UC-NRLF 


B    M 


527 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA 
SAN  FRANCISCO  LIBRARY 


The  Contemporary  Science  Series. 

Edited  by  Havelock   Ellis. 

Crown  %vo,  Cloth,  y.  6d.  per  vol.  ;  Half  Morocco,  6s.  6d. 

I.  THE  EVOLUTION  OF  SEX.     By  Prof.  PATRICK  GEDDES 

and  J.  ARTHUR  THOMSON.     With  90  Illustrations.     Second 
Edition. 

"  The  authors  have  brought  to  the  task — as  indeed  their  names  guarantee 
— a  wealth  of  knowledge,  a  lucid  and  attractive  method  of  treatment,  and  a 
rich  vein  of  picturesque  language." — Nature. 

"  A  work  which,  for  range  and  grace,  mastery  of  material,  originality,  and 
incisiveness  of  style  and  treatment,  is  not  readily  to  be  matched  in  the  long 
list  of  books  designed  more  or  less  to  popularise  science." — Scottish  Leaier. 

II.  ELECTRICITY    IN    MODERN    LIFE.      By  G.   W.    DE 

TUNZELMANN.     With  88  Illustrations. 

"A  clearly- written  and  connected  sketch  of  what  is  known  about  elec- 
tricity and  magnetism,  the  more  prominent  modern  applications,  and  the 
principles  on  which  they  are  based." — Saturday  Review. 

III.  THE    ORIGIN    OF    THE    ARYANS.      By     Dr.   ISAAC 

TAYLOR.     Illustrated.     Second  Edition. 

I'  Canon  Taylor  is  probably  the  most  encyclopaedic  all-round  scholar  now 
living.  His  new  volume  on  the  Origin  of  the  Aryans  is  a  first-rate  example 
of  the  excellent  account  to  which  he  can  turn  his  exceptionally  wide  and 
varied  information.  .  .  .  Masterly  and  exhaustive." — Fall  Mall  Gazette. 

IV.  PHYSIOGNOMY  AND  EXPRESSION.     By  P.  MANTE- 

GAZZA.     Illustrated. 

"Brings  this  highly  interesting  subject  even  with  the  latest  researches. 
.  .  .  Professor  Mantegazza  is  a  writer  full  of  life  and  spirit,  and  the  natural 
attractiveness  of  his  subject  is  not  destroyed  by  his  scientific  handling  of  it." 
Literary  World  ( Boston). 

V.  EVOLUTION  AND  DISEASE.     By  J.  B.  SUTTON,  F.R.C.S. 

With  135  Illustrations. 

"The  work  is  of  special  value  to  professional  men,  yet  educated  persons 
generally  will  find  much  in  it  which  it  is  both  interesting  and  important  to 
know."—  The  Scottish  Weekly. 

VI.  THE    VILLAGE    COMMUNITY.      By   G.    L.    GOMME. 
.    Illustrated. 

"  His  book  will  probably  remain  for  some  time  the  best  work  of  reference 
for  facts  bearing  on  those  traces  of  the  village  community  which  have  not 
been  effaced  by  conquest,  encroachment,  and  the  heavy  hand  of  Roman 
law. " — Scottish  Leader. 

VII.  THE  CRIMINAL.     By  HAVELOCK  ELLIS.     Illustrated. 
"An  ably  written,  an  instructive,  and  a  most  entertaining  book." — Law 

Quarterly  Review. 

"The  sociologist,  the  philosopher,  the  philanthropist,  the  novelist — 
all,  indeed,  for  whom  the  study  of  human  nature  has  any  attraction — will 
find  Mr.  Ellis  full  of  interest  and  suggestiveness." — Academy. 


VIII.  SANITY  AND  INSANITY.     By  Dr.  CHARLES  MERCIER. 
Illustrated 

"  He  has  laid  down  the  institutes  of  insanity." — Mind. 
"  Taken  as  a  whole,  it  is  the  brightest  book  on  the  physical  side  of 
mental  science  published  in  our  time." — Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

IX.  HYPNOTISM.     By  Dr.  ALBERT  MOLL  (Berlin).     Second 

Edition. 

"  Marks  a  step  of  some  importance  in  the  study  of  some  difficult  physio- 
logical and  psychological  problems  which  have  not  yet  received  much 
attention  in  the  scientific  world  of  England." — Nature. 

X.  MANUAL  TRAINING.    By  Dr.  C  M.  WOODWARD,  Director 

of  the  Manual  Training  School,  Washington  University,  St. 
Louis,  Mo.     Illustrated. 

"  There  is  no  greater  authority  on  the  subject  than  Professor  Woodward." 
— Manchester  Guardian. 

XI.  THE   SCIENCE   OF   FAIRY   TALES.      By  E.   SIDNEY 

HARTLAND. 

"  Mr.  Hartland's  book  will  win  the  sympathy  of  all  earnest  students, 
both  by  the  knowledge  it  displays,  and  by  a  thorough  love  and  appreciation 
of  his  subject,  which  is  evident  throughout." — Spectator. 

XII.  PRIMITIVE   FOLK.     By  ELIE  RECLUS. 

"An  attractive  and  useful  introduction  to  the  study  of  some  aspects  of 
ethnograpy. " — Nature. 

"  For  an  introduction  to  the  study  of  the  questions  of  property,  marriage, 
government,  religion, — in  a  word,  to  the  evolution  of  society, — this  little 
volume  will  be  found  most  convenient." — Scottish  Leader. 

XIII.  THE   EVOLUTION   OF   MARRIAGE.     By  Professor 

LETOURNEAU. 

"Among  the  distinguished  French  students  of  sociology,  Professor  Letour- 
neau  has  long  stood  in  the  first  rank.  He  approaches  the  great  study  of 
man  free  from  bias  and  shy  of  generalisations.  To  collect,  scrutinise,  and 
appraise  facts  is  his  chief  business.  In  the  volume  before  us  he  shows  these 
qualities  in  an  admirable  degree.  ...  At  the  close  of  his  attractive  pages 
he  ventures  to  forecast  the  future  of  the  institution  of  marriage." — Science. 

XIV.  BACTERIA  AND    THEIR  PRODUCTS.      By  Dr.  G. 

SIMS  WOODHEAD.     Illustrated. 

"An  excellent  summary  of  the  present  state  of  knowledge  of  the  subject." 
— Lancet. 

XV.  EDUCATION   AND    HEREDITY.      By  J.    M.   GUYAU. 
"  It  is  a  sign  of  the  value  of  this  book  that  the  natural  impulse  on  arriving 

at  its  last  page  is  to  turn  again  to  the  first,  and  try  to  gather  up  and  co- 
ordinate some  of  the  many  admirable  truths  it  presents." — Anti-Jacobin. 

XVI.  THE  MAN  OF  GENIUS.     By  Prof.  LOMBROSO.     Illus- 
trated. 

"  By  far  the  most  comprehensive  and  fascinating  collection  of  facts  and 
generalizations  concerning  genius   which  has  yet  been  brought  together." 
—-Journal  of  Mental  Science. 


London  :  WALTER  SCOTT,  24  Warwick  Lane,  Paternoster  Row. 


THE   CONTEMPORARY  SCIENCE   SERIES. 
EDITED  BY  HAVELOCK  ELLIS. 


THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 


THE 

GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 


BY 


KARL  VPEARSON,  M.A., 

Sir  Thomas  Greshatris  Professor  of  Geometry, 


"La  critique  est  la  vie  de  la  science."  —  COUSIN, 

Q.MS 


WITH  25  FIGURES  IN  THE  TEXT. 


LONDON: 

WALTER    SCOTT, 

24,  WARWICK  LANE,   PATERNOSTER   ROW, 
1892. 

911 

M  -  .      L!  JL 


THE   MEMORY   OF 

SIR  THOMAS  GRESHAM,   KNIGHT, 

WHILOM      MERCHANT 

OF    THE 
CITY   OF   LONDON. 


PREFACE. 


THERE  are  periods  in  the  growth  of  science  when 
it  is  well  to  turn  our  attention  from  its  imposing 
superstructure  and  to  carefullyexamine  its  foundations. 
The  present  book  is  primarily  intended  as  a  criticism 
of  the  fundamental  concepts  of  modern  science,  and 
as  such  finds  its  justification  in  the  motto  placed  upon 
its  title-page.  At  the  same  time  the  author  is  so  fully 
conscious  of  the  ease  of  criticism  and  the  difficulty  of 
reconstruction,  that  he  has  attempted  not  to  stop  short 
at  the  lighter  task.  No  one  who  knows  the  author's 
views,  or  who  reads,  indeed,  this  book,  will  believe 
that  he  holds  the  labour  of  the  great  scientists  or  the 
mission  of  modern  science  to  be  of  small  account.  If 
the  reader  finds  the  opinions  of  physicists  of  world- 
wide reputation,  and  the  current  definitions  of  physical 
concepts  called  into  question,  he  must  not  attribute 
this  to  a  purely  sceptical  spirit  in  the  author.  He 
accepts  almost  without  reserve  the  great  results  of 
modern  physics  ;  it  is  the  language  in  which  these 
results  are  stated  that  he  believes  needs  reconsider- 
ation. This  reconsideration  is  the  more  urgent  be- 


viii  PREFACE. 

cause  the  language  of  physics  is  widely  used  in  all 
branches  of  biological  (including  sociological)  science. 
The  obscurity  which  envelops  the  principia  of  science 
is  not  only  due  to  an  historical  evolution  marked  by 
the  authority  of  great  names,  but  to  the  fact  that 
science,  as  long  as  it  had  to  carry  on  a  difficult  warfare 
with  metaphysics  arid  dogma,  like  a  skilful  general 
conceived  it  best  to  hide  its  own  deficient  organiza- 
tion. There  can  be  small  doubt,  however,  that  this 
deficient  organization  will  not  only  in  time  be  per- 
ceived by  the  enemy,  but  that  it  has  already  had  a 
very  discouraging  influence  both  on  scientific  recruits 
and  on  intelligent  laymen.  ^Anything  more  hopelessly 
illogical  than  the  statements  with  regard  to  force  and 
matter  current  in  elementary  text-books  of  science,  it 
is  difficult  to  imagine  ;  and  the  author,  as  a  result  of 
some  ten  years'  teaching  and  examining,  has  been 
forced  to  the  conclusion  that  these  works  possess 
little,  if  any,  educational  value  ;  they  do  not  encourage 
the  growth  of  logical  clearness  or  form  any  exercise 
in  scientific  method.  One  result  of  this  obscurity  we 
probably  find  in  the  ease  with  which  the  physicist,  as 
compared  with  either  the  pure  mathematician  or  the 
historian,  is  entangled  in  the  meshes  of  such  pseudo- 
sciences  as  natural  theology  and  spiritualism.  If  the 
constructive  portion  of  this  work  appears  to  the 
reader  unnecessarily  dogmatic  or  polemical,  the  author 
would  beg  him  to  remember  that  it  is  essentially 
intended  to  arouse  and  stimulate  the  reader's  own 
thought,  rather  than  to  inculcate  doctrine :  this 
result  is  often  best  achieved  by  the  assertion  and 
contradiction  which  excite  the  reader  to  indepen- 
dent inquiry. 

The  views  expressed  in  this  Grammar  on  the  fun- 


PREFACE.  IX 

damental  concepts  of  science,  especially  on  those  of 
force  and  matter,  have  formed  part  of  the  author's 
teaching  since  he  was  first  called  upon  to  think  how 
the  elements  of  dynamical  science  could  be  presented 
free  from  metaphysics  to  young  students.  But  the 
endeavour  to  put  them  into  popular  language  only 
dates  from  the  author's  appointment  last  year  to  Sir 
Thomas  Gresham's  professorship  in  geometry.  The 
substance  of  this  work  formed  the  topic  of  two  intro- 
ductory courses  on  the  Scope  and  Concepts  of  Modern 
Science.  Gresham  College  is  but  the  veriest  shred  of 
what  its  founder  hoped  and  dreamt  it  would  become 
— a  great  teaching  university  for  London — but  the 
author  in  writing  this  volume,  whatever  its  failings, 
feels  that  so  far  as  in  him  lies  he  is  endeavouring  to 
return  to  the  precedent  set  by  the  earliest  and  most 
distinguished  of  his  predecessors  in  the  chair  of  geo- 
metry. To  restore  the  chair  and  the  college  to  its 
pristine  importance  is  work  worth  doing,  but  it  lies 
in  other  hands. 

This  Grammar  of  Science,  imperfect  as  it  is,  would 
have  been  still  more  wanting  but  for  the  continual 
help  and  sympathy  of  several  kind  friends.  Mr.  W. 
H.  Macaulay,  of  King's  College,  Cambridge,  has  given 
aid  in  many  ways,  ever  trying  to  keep  the  author's 
scientific  radicalism  within  moderate  and  reasonable 
bounds.  To  his  friend,  Mr.  R.  J.  Parker,  of  Lincoln's 
Inn,  the  author  is  indebted  for  a  continuation  of  that 
careful  and  suggestive  revision  which  he  has  for  the 
last  ten  years  given  to  nearly  everything  the  author 
has  written.  Especially,  however,  his  thanks  are  due 
to  Dr.  R.  J.  Ryle,  of  Barnet,  whose  logical  mind  and 
wide  historical  reading  have  produced  a  "  betterment," 
which  gives  him  almost  a  tenant-right  in  these  pages. 


X  PREFACE. 

Lastly,  the  author  has  to  thank  his  friend  and  former 
pupil,  Miss  Alice  Lee,  Demonstrator  in  Physics  at 
Bedford  College,  London,  for  the  preparation  of  the 
index  and  for  several  important  corrections. 

KARL  PEARSON. 
GRESHAM  COLLEGE,  LONDON. 
January,  1892. 


CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  I. 
INTRODUCTORY. 

PAGE 

I. — Science  and  the  Present     .            .             .            .  .1 

2. — Science  and  Citizenship            ....  7 

3.— The  First  Claim  of  Science           .             .            .  .10 

4. — Essentials  of  Good  Science      .            .            .             .  n 

5. — The  Scope  of  Science         .             .             .             .  .14 

6. — Science  and  Metaphysics          .            .             .             .  18 

7. — The  Ignorance  of  Science  .            .            .             .  .     23 

8.— The  Wide  Domain  of  Science             ...  29 

9.— The  Second  Claim  of  Science        .             .            .  .31 

io.— The  Third  Claim  of  Science  ....  35 

II. — Science  and  the  Imagination          .             .             .  .     36 

12. — The  Method  of  Science  Illustrated      ...  39 

13. — Science  and  the  ./Esthetic  Judgment          .             .  .42 

14.— The  Fourth  Claim  of  Science               ...  44 

Summary  and  Literature     .             .             .             •  ;     45 

CHAPTER  II. 
THE  FACTS  OF  SCIENCE. 

I.— The  Reality  of  Things        .            .            .            .  .47 

2. — Sense-Impressions  and  Consciousness  ...  50 

3.— The  Brain  as  a  Central  Telephone  Exchange       .  .     53 

4. — The  Nature  of  Thought           .            .            .            .  55 

5. — Other-Consciousness  as  an  Eject   .            .             .  •     59 

6. — Attitude  of  Science  towards  Ejects    .             .            .  61 

7. — The  Scientific  Validity  of  a  Conception    .             .  .64 

8. — The  Scientific  Validity  of  an  Inference           .             .  67 

9. — The  Limits  to  Other-Consciousness           .            .  .69 


xil  CONTENTS. 

§  10. — The  Canons  of  Legitimate  Inference  .            .            .  71 

§  n. — The  External  Universe       .            .             .            .  •     73 

§   12. — Outside  and  Inside  Myself      ....  77 

§   13. — Sensations    as    the    Ultimate   Source  of   the  Materials  of 

Knowledge    ......  80 

§  14. —Shadow  and  Reality           .            .            .             .  .83 

§   15. — Individuality      ......  86 

§  16.— The  Futility  of  "  Things-in-Themselves  "               .  .87 

§   17- — The    Term     Knowledge    is    meaningless    if    applied  to 

Unthinkable  Things           .            .            .            .  .89 

Summary  and  Literature          ....  90-1 


CHAPTER   III. 
THE  SCIENTIFIC  LAW. 

I. — Foreword  and  Resume       .            .            .  .            .92 

2. — Of  the  Word  Law  and  its  Meanings              .  .            94 

3. — Natural  Law  Relative  to  Man        .            .  .            •    99 

4. — Man  as  the  Maker  of  Natural  Law    .             .  .           102 

5.— The  Two  Senses  of  the  Words  "  Natural  Law  "  .   104 

6. — Confusion  between  the  Two  Senses  of  Natural  Law           106 

7. — The  Reason  behind   Nature            .            .  .             .109 

8. — True  Relation  of  Civil  and  Natural  Law       .  .          in 

9. — Physical  and  Metaphysical  Supersensuousness  .             .114 

10. — Progress  in  the  Formulating  of  Natural   Law  .          116 

n. — The  Universality  of  Scientific  Law            .  .             .   120 

12. — The  Routine  of  Perceptions  as  possibly  a  Product  of  the 

Perceptive  Faculty          .            .            .  .             .122 

13. — The  Mind  as  a   Sorting-Machine        .            .  .          128 

14. — Science,  Natural  Theology,  and  Metaphysics  .             .129 

15. — Conclusions       .            .            .            .            .  13* 

Summary  and  Literature    .            .            .  .            .   135 

CHAPTER  IV. 
CAUSE  AND  EFFECT.    PROBABILITY. 

I. — Mechanism          '  .                         .  •     J3^ 

2. — Force  as  a  Cause          .            .            •            •  .140 

3._Will  as  a  Cause    .  •     143 

4. — Secondary  Causes  Involve  no  Enforcement  .  144 

5.— Is  Will  a  First  Cause?    .  .     147 

6.— Will  as  a  Secondary  Cause    .            .             .  .148 


CONTENTS.  xiil 

PAGE 

§  7. — First  Causes  have  no  Existence  for  Science  .  .  151 

§  8.— Cause  and  Effect  as  the  Routine  of  Experience  .  153 

§  9.— Width  of  the  Term  Cause  .  .  .156 

§  10. — The  Universe  of  Sense-Impressions  as  a  Universe  of 

Motions.  ......     157 

§  ii. — Necessity  belongs  to  the  World  of  Conceptions,  not  to 

that  of  Perceptions  ....  .160 

§  12. — Routine  in  Perception  is  a  Necessary  Condition  of 

Knowledge  .  .  .  •  .  .  162 

§  13. — Probable  and  Provable  .....  166 
§  14. — Probability  as  to  Breaches  in  the  Routine  of  Perceptions  170 
§  15. — The  Basis  of  Laplace's  Theory  in  an  Experience  of 

Ignorance     ......  171 

§  16. — Nature  of  Laplace's  Investigations  .  .  .176 

§  17. — The  Permanency  of  Routine  for  the  Future  .  .  177 

Summary  and.  Literature  ....     180 


CHAPTER  V. 
SPACE  AND   TIME. 

§     i. — Space  as  a  Mode  of  Perception    .            .            .  .181 

§     2. — The  Infinite  Bigness  of  Space            .             .             .  187 

§     3. — The  Infinite  Divisibility  of  Space             .            .  .190 

§     4. — The  Space  of  Memoiy  and  Thought  .            .            .  193 
§     5. — Conceptions  and  Perceptions        ....     196 

§     6. — Sameness  and  Continuity        ....  200 

§     7. — Conceptual  Space,  Geometrical  Boundaries          .  .    203 

§     8. — Surfaces  as  Boundaries           ....  206 

§     9. — Conceptual  Discontinuity  of  Bodies.     The  Atom  .     208 

§  10. — Conceptual  Continuity.     Ether           .            .             .  213 

§  n. — On  the  General  Nature  of  Scientific  Conceptions  .     214 

§  12. — Time  as  a  Mode  of  Perception            .            .            .  217 

§  13. — Conceptual  Time  and  its  Measurement    .            .  .     222 

§  14.— Concluding  Remarks  on  Space  and  Time      .             .  228 
Summary  and  Literature   .....    229 

CHAPTER  VI. 
THE   GEOMETRY  OF  MOTION. 

§     i. — Motion  as  the  Mixed  Mode  of  Perception           .  .231 
§     2.— Conceptual   Analysis   of  a   Case  of  Perceptual  Motion. 

Point-Motion       .             .             .             .             .  .     233 


XIV  CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

§     3. — Rigid  Bodies  as  Geometrical  Ideals    .             .            .  237 

§     4. — On  Change  of  Aspect,  or  Rotation            .             .             .  239 

§     5. — On  Change  of  Form,  or  Strain            .             .             .  242 

§     6. — Factors  of  Conceptual  Motion       ....  246 

§     7. — Point-Motion.      Relative     Character     of    Position     and 

Motion    .......  247 

§     8.— Position.     The  Map  of  the  Path        ...  250 
§     9.— The  Time-Chart     .            .            .            .            .             .253 

§  10. — Steepness  and  Slope   .....  257 

§   ii. — Speed  as  a  Slope.     Velocity          ....  260 

§   12. — The  Velocity  Diagram,  or  Hodograph.     Acceleration  262 

§   13. — Acceleration  as  a  Spurt  and  a  Shunt       .             .             .  265 

§   14. — Curvature         ......  268 

§   15. — The  Relation  between  Curvature  and  Normal  Acceleration  273 

§   16. — Fundamental    Propositions  in  the  Geometry  of  Motion  .  276 
§  17. — The    Relativity  of  Motion.     Its  Synthesis  from  Simple 

Components        ......  279 

Summary  and  Literature         ...            *  284 


CHAPTER  VII. 
MATTER. 

i. — "All  Things  Move" — but  only  in  Conception.   .            .  285 

2.— The  Three  Problems   .....  288 

3. — How  the  Physicists  define  Matter  .  .  .291 

4. — Does  Matter  occupy  Space?  ....  296 

5. — The  "Common-sense"    View  of  Matter— Impenetrable 

and  Hard     ......  301 

6. — Individuality  does  not    denote  Sameness  in  Substratum  303 

7. — Hardness  not  characteristic  of  Matter             .            .  308 

8. — Matter  as  Non-Matter  in  Motion  ....  310 

9.— The  Ether  as  "Perfect  Fluid"  and  "Perfect  Jelly"  313 

IO. — The  Vortex-Ring  Atom  and  the  Ether-Squirt  Atom         .  316 

ii. — A  Material  Loophole  into  the  Supersensuous            .  319 

12. — The  Difficulties  of  a  Perceptual  Ether      .             .             .  323 

13. — Why  do  Bodies  move?            ....  325 

Summary  and  Literature    .....  330 

CHAPTER  VIII. 
THE  LAWS  OF  MOTION. 

I. — Corpuscles  and  their  Structure                              »            .  332 

2. — The  Limits  to  Mechanism       .            .            .            .  337 


CONTENTS.     •  XV 

PAGE 

§  3. — The  First  Law  of  Motion  ....  340 

§  4. — The  Second  Law  of  Motion,  or  the  Principle  of  Inertia  342 
§  5. — The  Third  Law  of  Motion.  Acceleration  is  determined 

by  Position  ......  345 

§  6. — Velocity  as  an  Epitome  of  Past  History.  Mechanism 

and  Materialism  .  .  .  .  .  351 

§  7. — The  Fourth  Law  of  Motion  .  .  .  .  354 

§  8. — The  Scientific  Conception  of  Mass  .  .  .  357 

§  9.— The  Fifth  Law  of  Motion.  The  Definition  of  Force  359 

§  10. — Equality  of  Masses  tested  by  Weighing  .  .  .  363 
§  il.: — How  far  does  the  Mechanism  of  the  Fourth  and  Fifth 

Laws  of  Motion  extend  ?  367 

§  12. — Density  as  the  Basis  of  the  Kinetic  Scale  .  .  370 

§  13. — The  Influence  of  Aspect  on  the  Corpuscular  Dance  .  374 
§  14. — The  Hypothesis  of  Modified  Action  and  the  Synthesis 

of  Motion             ......  376 

§  15. — Criticism  of  the  Newtonian  Laws  of  Motion  .  380 

Summary  and  Literature  ....  386 


CHAPTER  IX. 
LIFE. 

§  i.— The  Relation  of  Biology  to  Physics  .  .  .388 

§  2. — Mechanism  and  Life  .....  392 

§  3. — Mechanism  and  Metaphysics  in  Theories  of  Heredity  .  395 

§  4. — The  Definition  of  Living  and  Lifeless  .  .  400 

§  5. — Do  the  Laws  of  Motion  apply  to  Life  ?  .  .  .  404 

§  6. — Life  Defined  by  Secondary  Characteristics  .  .  408 

§  7. — The  Origin  of  Life  .....  410 

§  8. — The  Perpetuity  of  Life,  or  Biogenesis  .  .  411 

§  9. — The  Spontaneous  Generation  of  Life,  or  Abiogenesis  .  413 

§  10. — The  Origin  of  Life  in  an  "ultra-scientific"  Cause  .  417 
§  ii. — On  the  Relation  of  the  Conceptual  Description  to  the 

Phenomenal  World  .....  420 

§  12. — Natural  Selection  in  the  Inorganic  World  .  .  422 

§  13. — Natural  Selection  and  the  History  of  Man  .  .  425 
§  14. — Primitive  History  describable  in  terms  of  the  Principles 

of  Evolution       ......  428 

§  15. — Morality  and  Natural  Selection          .             .            .  430 

§  16. — Individualism,  Socialism,  and  Humanism              .             .  434 

Summary  and  Literature          ....  439 


xvi  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  X. 
THE  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THE  SCIENCES. 

PAGE 

§  I. — Summary  as  to  the  Material  of  Science   .            .            .    441 

§  2. — Bacon's  "  Intellectual  Globe  "...           443 

§  3.— Comte's  "Hierarchy"       .            .            .            .            .446 

§  4.— Spencer's  Classification            ....           448 

§  5. — Precise  and  Synoptic  Sciences      ....    452 

§  6. — Abstract  and  Concrete  Sciences. — Abstract  Science  .           454 

§  7. — Concrete  Science. — Inorganic  Phenomena            .            .    459 

§  8. — Concrete  Science. — Organic  Phenomena        .            .           465 

§  9. — Applied  Mathematics  and  Bio-Physics  as  Cross  Links    .     469 

§  10. — Conclusion       .            .            .            .            .            .471 

Summary  and  Literature  .....    475 

APPENDIX. 

Note     I.  On  the  Principle  of  Inertia  and  Absolute  Rotation    .     477 

Note    II.  On  Newton's  Third  Law  of  Motion          .            .  480 

Note  III.  William  of  Occam's  Razor       .             .            .  .481 

Note  IV.  On  the  Vitality  of  Seeds  ....  482 

Note    V.  A.  R.  Wallace  on  Matter        .             .            .  .483 
Note  VI.  On  the  Sufficiency  of  Natural  Selection  to  account  for 

the  History  of  Civilized  Man            .            .  .    484 

INDEX. 


THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 


CHAPTER   1. 

INTRODUCTORY.— THE  SCOPE  AND  METHOD  OF 
SCIENCE. 

§  i. — Science  and  the  Present. 

WITHIN  the  past  forty  years  so  revolutionary 
a  change  has  taken  place  in  our  appreciation 
of  the  essential  facts  in  the  growth  of  human  society, 
that  it  has  become  necessary  not  only  to  rewrite 
history,  but  to  profoundly  modify  our  theory  of  life 
and  gradually,  but  none  the  less  certainly,  to  adapt 
our  conduct  to  the  novel  theory.  The  insight  which 
the  investigations  of  Darwin,  seconded  by  the  sugges- 
tive but  far  less  permanent  work  of  Spencer,  have 
given  us  into  the  development  of  both  individual 
and  social  life,  has  compelled  us  to  remodel  our 
historical  ideas  and  is  slowly  widening  and  consoli- 
dating our  moral  standards.  The  slowness  ought  not 
to  dishearten  us,  for  one  of  the  strongest  factors  of 
social  stability  is  the  inertness,  nay,  rather  active 
hostility,  with  which  human  societies  receive  all  new 
ideas.  It  is  the  crucible  in  which  the  dross  is  separated 
from  the  genuine  metal,  and  which  saves  the  body- 
social  from  a  succession  of  unprofitable  and  possibly 

2 


2  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

injurious  experimental  variations.  That  the  reformer 
should  be  also  the  martyr  is,  perhaps,  a  not  over-great 
price  to  pay  for  the  caution  with  which  society  as  a 
whole  must  move ;  to  replace  an  individual  man  may 
require  years,  but  a  stable  and  efficient  society  is 
the  outcome  of  centuries  of  development. 

If  we  have  learnt,  indirectly  it  may  be,  from  the 
writings  of  Darwin  that  the  means  of  production, 
the  holding  of  property,  the  forms  of  marriage,  and 
the  organization  of  the  family  are  the  essential  factors 
which  the  historian  has  to  trace  in  the  growth  of 
Human  society  ;  if  in  our  history  books  we  are  ceasing 
to  head  periods  with  the  names  of  monarchs  and  to 
devote  whole  paragraphs  to  their  mistresses,  still  we 
are  far  indeed  from  clearly  grasping  the  exact  inter- 
action of  the  various  factors  of  social  evolution,  or 
understanding  why  one  becomes  predominant  at  one  or 
another  epoch.  We  can  indeed  mark  periods  of  great 
social  activity  and  others  of  apparent  quiescence,  but 
it  is  probably  only  our  ignorance  of  the  exact  stages 
of  social  evolution,  which  leads  us  to  associate  the 
fundamental  variations  in  social  institutions  with  re- 
formations and  revolutions.  We  associate,  it  is  true, 
the  German  Reformation  with  a  replacement  of 
collectivist  by  individualist  standards,  not  only  in 
religion  but  also  in  handicraft,  art,  and  politics. 
The  French  Revolution  in  like  manner  is  the  epoch 
from  which  many  are  inclined  to  date  the  rebirth  of 
those  social  ideas  which  have  largely  remoulded 
the  mediaeval  relations  of  class  and  caste,  relations 
little  affected  by  the  sixteenth-century  Reformation. 
Coming  nearer  to  our  own  time  indeed  we  can  measure 
with  some  degree  of  accuracy  the  social  influence  of 
the  great  changes  in  the  method  of  production,  the 


INTRODUCTORY.  3 

transition  from  home  to  capitalistic  production,  which 
transformed  English  life  in  the  first  half  of  this 
century,  and  has  since  made  its  way  throughout  the 
civilized  world.  But  when  we  come  to  our  own  age, 
an  age  one  of  the  most  marked  features  of  which  is 
the  startlingly  rapid  growth  of  the  natural  sciences 
and  their  far-reaching  influence  on  the  standards  of 
both  the  comfort  and  conduct  of  human  life,  we  find 
it  impossible  to  compress  its  social  history  into  the 
bald  phrases  by  which  we  attempt  to  connote  the 
characteristics  of  more  distant  historical  epochs. 

It  is  very  difficult  for  us  who  live  in  the  last  quarter 
of  the  nineteenth  century  to  rightly  measure  the 
relative  importance  of  our  age  in  the  history  of 
civilization.  In  the  first  place  we  can  look  at  it  only 
from  one  standpoint — that  of  the  past.  It  needed  at 
least  an  Erasmus  to  predict  the  outcome  of  the 
Reformation  from  all  that  preceded  the  Diet  of  Worms. 
Or,  to  adopt  a  metaphor,  a  blind  man  climbing  a  hill 
might  have  a  considerable  appreciation  of  the  various 
degrees  of  steepness  in  the  parts  he  had  traversed,  and 
he  might  even  have  a  reasonable  amount  of  certainty 
as  to  the  slope  whereon  he  was  standing  for  the 
time  being,  but  whether  that  slope  led  immediately 
to  a  steeper  ascent,  or  was  practically  the  top,  it 
would  be  impossible  for  him  to  say.  In  the  next 
place  we  are  too  close  to  our  age,  both  in  position  and 
feeling,  to  appreciate  without  foreshortening  and  per- 
sonal prejudice  the  magnitude  of  the  changes  which 
are  undoubtedly  taking  place. 

The  contest  of  opinion  in  nearly  every  field  of 
thought — the  struggle  of  old  and  new  standards  in 
every  sphere  of  activity,  in  religion,  in  commerce,  in 
social  life — touch  the  spiritual  and  physical  needs  of 


4  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE 

the  individual  far  too  nearly  for  us  to  be  dispassionate 
judges  of  the  age  in  which  we  live.  That  we  live 
in  an  era  of  rapid  social  variation  can  scarcely  be 
doubted  by  any  one  who  regards  attentively  the 
marked  contrasts  presented  by  our  modern  society. 
It  is  an  era  alike  of  great  self-assertion  and  of  exces- 
sive altruism  ;  we  see  the  highest  intellectual  power 
accompanied  by  the  strangest  recrudescence  of  super- 
stition ;  there  is  a  strong  socialist  drift  and  yet  not  a 
few  remarkable  individualist  teachers  ;  the  extremes 
of  religious  faith  and  of  unequivocal  freethought  are 
found  jostling  each  other.  Nor  do  these  opposing 
traits  exist  only  in  close  social  juxtaposition.  The 
same  individual  mind,  unconscious  of  its  own  want 
of  logical  consistency,  will  often  exhibit  our  age  in 
microcosm. 

It  is  little  wonder  that  we  have  hitherto  made 
small  way  towards  a  common  estimate  of  what 
our  time  is  really  contributing  to  the  history  of 
human  progress.  The  one  man  finds  in  our  time  a 
restlessness,  a  distrust  of  authority,  a  questioning  of 
the  basis  of  all  social  institutions  and  long-established 
methods — characteristics  which  mark  for  him  a 
decadence  of  social  unity,  a  collapse  of  the  only 
principles  which  he  conceives  capable  of  guiding 
conduct.  The  other  with  a  different  temperament 
pictures  for  us  a  golden  age  in  the  near  future,  when 
the  new  knowledge  shall  be  diffused  through  the 
people,  and  when  the  new  view  of  human  relations, 
which  he  finds  everywhere  taking  root,  shall  finally 
have  supplanted  worn-out  customs. 

One  teacher  propounds  what  is  flatly  contradicted 
by  a  second.  "  We  want  more  piety,"  cries  one ; 
"  We  must  have  less,"  retorts  another.  u  State  inter- 


INTRODUCTORY.  5 

ference  in  the  hours  of  labour  is  absolutely  needful," 
declares  a  third  ;  "  It  will  destroy  all  individual  initia- 
tion and  self-dependence,"  rejoins  a  fourth.  "The 
salvation  of  the  country  depends  upon  the  technical 
education  of  its  workpeople,"  is  the  shout  of  one 
party ;  "  Technical  education  is  merely  a  trick  by 
which  the  employer  of  labour  thrusts  upon  the  nation 
the  expense  of  providing  himself  with  better  human 
machines,"  is  the  prompt  answer  of  its  opponents. 
"  We  need  more  private  chanty,"  say  some  ;  "  All 
private  charity  is  an  anomaly,  a  waste  of  the  nation's 
resources  and  a  pauperizing  of  its  members,"  reply 
others.  "  Endow  scientific  research  and  we  shall  know 
the  truth,  when  and  where  it  is  possible  to  ascertain 
it ; "  but  the  counterblast  is  at  hand :  "  To  endow 
research  is  merely  to  encourage  the  research  for 
endowment ;  the  true  man  of  science  will  not  be  held 
back  by  poverty,  and  if  science  is  of  use  to  us,  it  will 
pay  for  itself."  Such  are  but  a  few  samples  of  the 
conflict  of  opinion  which  we  find  raging  around  us. 
The  prick  of  conscience  and  the  prick  of  poverty 
have  succeeded  in  arousing  a  wonderful  restlessness  in 
our  generation — and  this  at  a  time  when  the  advance 
of  positive  knowledge  has  called  in  question  many 
of  the  old  customs  and  old  authorities.  It  is  true  that 
there  are  but  few  remedies  which  have  not  a  fair 
chance  to-day  of  being  put  upon  their  trial.  Vast 
sums  of  money  are  raised  for  every  sort  of  charitable 
scheme,  for  popular  entertainment,  for  technical 
instruction,  and  even  for  higher  education — in  short, 
for  religious,  semi-religious,  and  anti-religious  move- 
ments of  all  types.  Out  of  this  chaos  ought  at  least 
to  come  some  good  ;  but  how  shall  we  set  the  good 
against  the  evil  which  too  often  arises  from  ill-defined, 


6  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

or  even  undefined,  appropriation  of  those  resources 
which  the  nation  has  spared  by  the  hard  labour  of 
the  past,  or  is  drawing  on  the  future's  credit  ? 

The  responsibility  of  individuals,  especially  with 
regard  to  wealth,  is  great,  so  great  that  we  see  a  growing 
tendency  of  the  state  to  interfere  in  the  administration 
of  private  charities  and  to  regulate  the  great  educa- 
tional institutions  endowed  by  private  or  semi-public 
benefactions  in  the  past.  But  this  tendency  to  throw 
back  the  responsibility  from  the  individual  upon  the 
state  is  really  only  throwing  it  back  on  the  social 
conscience  of  the  citizens  as  a  body — the  "  tribal 
conscience,"  as  Professor  Clifford  was  wont  to  call  it 
The  wide  extension  of  the  franchise  in  both  local  and 
central  representation  has  cast  a  greatly  increased 
responsibility  on  the  individual  citizen.  He  is  brought 
face  to  face  with  the  most  conflicting  opinions  and 
with  the  most  diverse  party  cries.  The  state  has 
become  in  our  day  the  largest  employer  of  labour,  the 
greatest  dispenser  of  charity,  and,  above  all,  the  school- 
master with  the  biggest  school  in  the  community. 
Directly  or  indirectly  the  individual  citizen  has  to  find 
some  reply  to  the  innumerable  social  and  educational 
problems  of  the  day.  He  requires  some  guide  in  the 
determination  of  his  own  action  or  in  the  choice  of 
fitting  representatives.  He  is  thrust  into  an  appalling 
maze  of  social  and  educational  problems ;  and  if  his 
tribal  conscience  has  any  stuff  in  it,  he  feels  that 
these  problems  ought  not  to  be  settled,  so  far  as  he 
has  the  power  of  settling  them,  by  his  own  personal 
interests,  by  his  individual  prospects  of  profit  or  loss. 
He  is  called  upon  to  form  a  judgment  apart  from  his 
own  feelings  and  emotions  if  it  possibly  may  be — a 
judgment  in  what  he  conceives  to  be  the  interests  of 


INTRODUCTORY.  7 

society  at  large.  It  may  be  a  difficult  thing  for  the 
large  employer  of  labour  to  form  a  right  judgment  in 
matters  of  factory  legislation,  or  for  the  private  school- 
master to  see  clearly  in  questions  of  state-aided 
education.  None  the  less  we  should  probably  all 
agree  that  the  tribal  conscience  ought  for  the  sake  of 
social  welfare  to  be  stronger  than  private  interest,  and 
that  the  ideal  citizen,  if  he  existed,  would  form  a 
judgment  free  from  personal  bias. 

§  2. — Science  and  Citize?iship. 

How  is  such  a  judgment — so  necessary  in  our  time 
with  its  hot  conflict  of  personal  opinion  and  its  in- 
creased responsibility  for  the  individual  citizen — how 
is  such  a  judgment  to  be  formed  ?  In  the  first  place 
it  is  obvious  that  it  can  only  be  based  on  a  clear 
knowledge  of  facts,  an  appreciation  of  their  sequence 
and  relative  significance.  The  facts  once  classified, 
once  understood,  the  judgment  based  upon  them 
ought  to  be  independent  of  the  individual  mind 
which  examines  them.  Is  there  any  other  sphere, 
outside  that  of  ideal  citizenship,  in  which  there  is 
habitual  use  of  this  method  of  classifying  facts  and 
forming  judgments  upon  them  ?  For  if  there  be,  it 
cannot  fail  to  be  suggestive  as  to  methods  of  elimi- 
nating individual  bias  ;  it  ought  to  be  one  of  the 
best  training  grounds  for  citizenship.  The  classifica- 
tion of  facts  and  the  formation  of  absolute  judgments 
upon  the  basis  of  this  classification — judgments  in- 
dependent of  the  idiosyncrasies  of  the  individual 
mind — is  peculiarly  the  scope  and  metJiod  of  modern 
science.  The  scientific  man  has  above  all  things  to 
aim  at  self-elimination  in  his  judgments,  to  provide 
an  argument  which  is  as  true  for  each  individual 


8  THE  GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

mind  as  for  his  own.  The  classification  of  facts,  the 
recognition  of  their  sequence  and  relative  significance  is 
the  function  of  science,  and  the  habit  of  forming  a 
judgment  upon  these  facts  unbiased  by  personal 
feeling  is  characteristic  of  what  we  shall  term  the 
scientific  frame  of  mind.  The  scientific  method  of 
examining  facts  is  not  peculiar  to  one  class  of 
phenomena  and  to  one  class  of  workers ;  it  is 
applicable  to  social  as  well  as  to  physical  problems, 
and  we  must  carefully  guard  ourselves  against  sup- 
posing that  the  scientific  frame  of  mind  is  a 
peculiarity  of  the  professional  scientist. 

Now  this  frame  of  mind  seems  to  me  an  essential  of 
good  citizenship,  and  of  the  several  ways  in  which  it 
can  be  acquired  few  surpass  the  careful  study  of  some 
one  branch  of  natural  science.  The  insight  into 
method  and  the  habit  of  dispassionate  investigation 
which  follow  from  acquaintance  with  the  scientific 
classification  of  even  some  small  range  of  natural 
facts,  give  the  mind  an  invaluable  power  of  dealing 
with  many  other  classes  of  facts  as  the  occasion 
arises.1  The  patient  and  persistent  study  of  some 
one  branch  of  natural  science  is  even  at  the  present 
time  within  the  reach  of  many.  In  some  branches  a 
few  hours'  study  a  week,  if  carried  on  earnestly  for 


1  To  decry  specialization  in  education  is  to  misinterpret  the  purpose 
of  education.  The  true  aim  of  the  teacher  must  be  to  impart  an 
appreciation  of  method  and  not  a  knowledge  of  facts.  This  is  far 
more  readily  achieved  by  concentrating  the  student's  attention  on  a 
small  range  of  phenomena,  than  by  leading  him  in  rapid  and  superficial 
survey  over  wide  fields  of  knowledge.  Personally  I  have  no  recollection 
of  at  least  90  per  cent,  of  the  facts  that  were  taught  to  me  at  school, 
but  the  notions  of  method  which  I  derived  from  my  instructor  in  Greek 
Grammar  (the  contents  of  which  I  have  long  forgotten),  remained  in 
my  mind  as  the  really  valuable  part  of  my  school  equipment  for  life. 


INTRODUCTORY.  9 

two  or  three  years,  would  be  not  only  sufficient  to 
give  a  thorough  insight  into  scientific  method,  but 
would  also  enable  the  student  to  become  a  careful 
observer  and  possibly  an  original  investigator  in  his 
chosen  field,  thus  adding  a  new  delight  and  a  new 
enthusiasm  to  his  life.  The  importance  of  a  just 
appreciation  of  scientific  method  is  so  great,  that  I 
think  the  state  may  be  reasonably  called  upon  to 
place  instruction  in  pure  science  within  the  reach  of 
all  its  citizens.  Indeed,  we  ought  to  look  with 
extreme  distrust  on  the  large  expenditure  of  public 
money  on  polytechnics  and  similar  institutions,  if  the 
manual  instruction  which  it  is  proposed  to  give  at 
these  places  be  not  accompanied  by  efficient  teaching 
in  pure  science.  The  scientific  habit  of  mind  is  one 
which  may  be  acquired  by  all,  and  the  readiest  means 
of  attaining  to  it  ought  to  be  placed  within  the  reach 
of  all. 

The  reader  must  be  careful  to  note  that  I  am  only 
praising  the  scientific  habit  of  mind,  and  suggesting 
one  of  several  methods  by  which  it  may  be  cultivated, 
No  assertion  has  been  made  that  the  man  of  science 
is  necessarily  a  good  citizen,  or  that  his  judgment 
upon  social  or  political  questions  will  certainly  be 
of  weight.  It  by  no  means  follows  that,  because  a 
man  has  won  a  name  for  himself  in  the  field  oi 
natural  science,  his  judgments  on  such  problems 
as  Socialism,  Home  Rule,  or  Biblical  Theology  will 
necessarily  be  sound.  They  will  be  sound  or  not 
according  as  he  has  carried  his  scientific  method  into 
these  fields.  He  must  properly  have  classified  and 
appreciated  his  facts,  and  have  been  guided  by  them, 
and  not  by  personal  feeling  or  class  bias  in  his 
judgments.  It  is  the  scientific  habit  of  mind  as  an 


16  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

essential  for  good  citizenship  and  not  the  scientist  as 
a  sound  politician  that  I  wish  to  emphasize. 

§  3. — The  First  Claim  of  Modern  Science. 

We  have  gone  a  rather  roundabout  way  to  reach 
our  definition  of  science  and  scientific  method.  But 
it  has  been  of  purpose,  for  in  the  spirit — and  it  is  a 
healthy  spirit — of  our  age  we  have  accustomed  our- 
selves to  question  all  things  and  to  demand  a  reason 
for  their  existence.  The  sole  reason  that  can  be 
given  for  any  social  institution  or  form  of  human 
activity — I  mean  not  how  they  came  to  exist,  which 
is  a  matter  of  history,  but  why  we  continue  to 
encourage  their  existence — lies  in  this  :  their  existence 
tends  to  promote  the  welfare  of  human  society,  to 
increase  social  happiness,  or  to  strengthen  social 
stability.  In  the  spirit  of  our  age  we  are  bound  to 
question  the  value  of  science  ;  to  ask  in  what  way  it 
increases  the  happiness  of  mankind  or  promotes 
social  efficiency.  We  must  justify  the  existence  of 
modern  science,  or  at  least  the  large  and  growing 
demands  which  it  makes  upon  the  national  exchequer. 
Apart  from  the  increased  physical  comfort,  apart 
from  the  intellectual  enjoyment  which  modern  science 
provides  for  the  community — points  often  and  loudly 
insisted  upon  and  to  which  I  shall  briefly  refer  later 
— there  is  another  and  more  fundamental  justification 
for  the  time  and  material  spent  in  scientific  work. 
From  the  standpoint  of  morality,  or  from  the  relation 
of  the  individual  unit  to  other  members  of  the  same 
social  group,  we  have  to  judge  each  human  activity 
by  its  outcome  in  conduct.  How,  then,  does  science 
justify  itself  in  its  influence  on  the  conduct  of  men 
as  citizens?  I  assert  that  the  encouragement  of 


INTRODUCTORY.  11 

scientific  investigation  and  the  spread  of  scientific 
knowledge  by  largely  inculcating  scientific  habits 
of  mind  will  lead  to  more  efficient  citizenship  and 
so  to  increased  social  stability.  Minds  trained  to 
scientific  methods  are  less  likely  to  be  led  by  mere 
appeal  to  the  passions,  by  blind  emotional  excitement 
to  sanction  acts  which  in  the  end  may  lead  to  social 
disaster.  In  the  first  and  foremost  place,  therefore, 
I  lay  stress  upon  the  educational  side  of  modern 
science,  and  state  my  proposition  in  some  such  words 
as  these : — 

Modern  Science^  as  training  the  mind  to  an  exact 
and  impartial  analysis  of  facts  is  an  edit  cation  specially 
fitted  to  promote  sound  citizenship. 

Our  first  conclusion,  then,  as  to  the  value  of  science 
for  practical  life  turns  upon  the  efficient  training  it 
provides  in  method.  The  man  who  has  accustomed 
himself  to  marshal  facts,  to  examine  their  complex 
mutual  relations,  and  predict  upon  the  result  of  this 
examination  their  inevitable  sequences — sequences 
which  we  term  natural  laws  and  which  are  as  valid 
for  every  normal  mind  as  for  that  of  the  individual 
investigator — such  a  man  we  may  hope  will  carry  his 
scientific  method  into  the  field  of  social  problems. 
He  will  scarcely  be  content  with  mere  superficial  state- 
ment, with  mere  appeal  to  the  imagination,  to  the 
emotions,  to  individual  prejudices.  He  will  demand 
a  high  standard  of  reasoning,  a  clear  insight  into 
facts  and  their  results,  and  his  demand  cannot  fail  to 
be  beneficial  to  the  community  at  large. 

§  4. — Essentials  of  Good  Science. 

I  want  the  reader  to  appreciate  clearly  that  science 
justifies  itself  in  its  methods,  quite  apart  from  any 


12  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

serviceable  knowledge  it  may  convey.  We  are  too 
apt  to  forget  this  purely  educational  side  of  science 
in  the  great  value  of  its  practical  applications.  We 
see  too  often  the  plea  raised  for  science  that  it  is 
useful  knowledge,  while  grammar  and  philosophy  are 
supposed  to  have  small  utilitarian  or  commercial 
value.  Science,  indeed,  often  teaches  us  facts  of 
primary  importance  for  practical  life  ;  yet  not  on 
this  account,  but  because  it  leads  us  to  classifications 
and  systems  independent  of  the  individual  thinker, 
to  sequences  and  laws  admitting  of  no  play-room 
for  individual  fancy,  must  we  rate  the  training  of 
science  and  its  social  value  higher  than  those  of 
grammar  and  philosophy.  Herein  lies  the  first,  but 
of  course  not  the  sole,  ground  for  the  popularization 
of  science.  That  form  of  popular  science  which 
merely  recites  the  results  of  investigations,  which 
merely  communicates  useful  knowledge,  is  from  this 
standpoint  bad  science,  or  no  science  at  all.  Let  me 
recommend  the  reader  to  apply  this  test  to  every 
work  professing  to  give  a  popular  account  of  any 
branch  of  science.  If  any  such  work  gives  a 
description  of  phenomena  that  appeals  to  his  ima- 
gination rather  than  to  his  reason,  then  it  is  bad 
science.  The  first  aim  of  any  genuine  work  of 
science,  however  popular,  ought  to  be  the  presentation 
of  such  a  classification  of  facts  that  the  reader's  mind 
is  irresistibly  led  to  acknowledge  a  logical  sequence 
— a  law  which  appeals  to  the  reason  before  it 
captivates  the  imagination.  Let  us  be  quite  sure 
that  whenever  we  come  across  a  conclusion  in  a 
scientific  work  which  does  not  flow  from  the  classifi- 
cation of  facts,  or  which  is  not  directly  stated  by  the 
author  to  be  an  assumption,  then  we  are  dealing  with 


INTRODUCTORY.  13 

bad  science.  Good  science  will  always  be  intelligible 
to  the  logically  trained  mind,  if  that  mind  can  read 
and  translate  the  language  in  which  science  is  written. 
The  scientific  method  is  one  and  the  same  in  all 
branches,  and  that  method  is  the  method  of  all 
logically  trained  minds.  In  this  respect  the  great 
classics  of  science  are  often  the  most  intelligible  of 
books,  and  if  so,  are  far  better  worth  reading  than 
popularizations  of  them  written  by  men  with  less 
insight  into  scientific  method.  Works  like  Darwin's 
Origin  of  Species  and  Descent  of  Man,  Lyell's 
Principles  of  Geology,  Helmholtz's  Sensations  of  Tone, 
or  Weismann's  Essays  on  Heredity,  can  be  profitably 
read  and  largely  understood  by  those  who  are  not 
specially  trained  in  the  several  branches  of  science 
with  which  these  works  deal.1  It  may  need  some 
patience  in  the  interpretation  of  scientific  terms,  in 
learning  the  language  of  science,  but  like  most  cases 
in  which  a  new  language  has  to  be  learnt,  the  com- 
parison of  passages  in  which  the  same  word  or  term 
recurs,  will  soon  lead  to  a  just  appreciation  of  its 
true  meaning.  In  the  matter  of  language  the  de- 
scriptive natural  sciences  such  as  geology  or  biology 
are  more  easily  accessible  to  the  layman  than  the 
exact  sciences  such  as  algebra  or  mechanics,  where 
the  reasoning  process  must  often  be  clothed  in 
mathematical  symbols,  the  right  interpretation  of 
which  may  require  months,  if  not  years,  of  study. 
To  this  distinction  between  the  descriptive  and  exact 
sciences  I  propose  to  return  later,  when  we  are  deal- 
ing with  the  classification  of  the  sciences. 

1  The  list  might  be  easily  increased,  for  example  by  W.  Harvey's 
Anatomical  Dissertation  on  the  Motion  of  the  Heart  and  Blood,  and  by 
Faraday's  Experimental  Researches. 


14  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

I  would  not  have  the  reader  suppose  that  the  mere 
perusal  of  some  standard  scientific  work  will,  in  my 
opinion,  produce  a  scientific  habit  of  mind.  I  only 
suggest  that  it  will  give  some  insight  into  scientific 
method  and  some  appreciation  of  its  value.  Those 
who  can  devote  persistently  some  four  or  five  hours 
a  week  to  the  conscientious  study  of  any  one  limited 
branch  of  science  will  achieve  in  the  space  of  a  year 
or  two  much  more  than  this.  The  busy  layman  is 
not  bound  to  seek  about  for  some  branch  which  will 
give  him  useful  facts  for  his  profession  or  occupation 
in  life.  It  does  not  indeed  matter  for  the  purpose  we 
have  now  in  view  whether  he  seek  to  make  himself 
proficient  in  geology,  or  biology,  or  geometry,  or 
mechanics,  or  even  history  or  folklore,  if  these  be 
studied  scientifically.  What  is  necessary  is  the 
thorough  knowledge  of  some  small  group  of  facts,  the 
recognition  of  their  relationship  to  each  other,  and  of 
the  formulae  or  laws  which  express  scientifically  their 
sequences.  It  is  in  this  manner  that  the  mind 
becomes  imbued  with  the  scientific  method  and  freed 
from  individual  bias  in  the  formation  of  its  judg- 
ments— one  of  the  conditions,  as  we  have  seen,  for 
ideally  good  citizenship.  This  first  claim  of  scientific 
training,  its  education  in  method,  is  to  my  mind  the 
most  powerful  claim  it  has  to  state  support.  I  believe 
more  will  be  achieved  by  placing  instruction  in  pure 
science  within  the  reach  of  all  our  citizens,  than  by 
any  number  of  polytechnics  devoting  themselves  to 
technical  education,  which  does  not  rise  above  the 
level  of  manual  instruction. 

§  5.—  The  Scope  of  Science. 
The  reader  may,  perhaps,  feel  that  I  am  laying  all 


INTRODUCTORY.  1 5 

stress  upon  method  at  the  expense  of  solid  contents. 
Now  this  is  the  peculiarity  of  scientific  method,  that 
when  once  it  has  become  a  habit  of  mind,  that  mind 
converts  all  facts  whatsoever  into  science.  The  field 
of  science  is  unlimited  ;  its  solid  contents  are  endless, 
every  group  of  natural  phenomena,  every  phase  of 
social  life,  every  stage  of  past  or  present  development 
is  material  for  science.  The  unity  of  all  science  con- 
sists alone  in  its  method,  not  in  its  material  The  man 
who  classifies  facts  of  any  kind  whatever,  who  sees 
their  mutual  relation  and  describes  their  sequence,  is 
applying  the  scientific  method  and  is  a  man  of  science. 
The  facts  may  belong  to  the  past  history  of  mankind, 
to  the  social  statistics  of  our  great  cities,  to  the 
atmosphere  of  the  most  distant  stars,  to  the  digestive 
organs  of  a  worm,  or  to  the  life  of  a  scarcely  visible 
bacillus.  It  is  not  the  facts  themselves  which  form 
science,  but  the  method  in  which  they  are  dealt  with. 
The  material  of  science  is  coextensive  with  the  whole 
physical  universe,  not  only  that  universe  as  it  now 
exists,  but  with  its  past  history  and  the  past  history 
of  all  life  therein.  When  every  fact,  every  present  or 
past  phenomenon  of  that  universe,  every  phase  of 
present  or  past  life  therein,  has  been  examined, 
classified,  and  co-ordinated  with  the  rest,  then  the 
mission  of  science  will  be  completed.  What  is  this 
but  saying  that  the  task  of  science  can  never  end  till 
man  ceases  to  be,  till  history  is  no  longer  made,  and 
development  itself  ceases  ? 

It  might  be  supposed  that  science  has  made  such 
strides  in  the  last  two  centuries,  and  notably  in 
the  last  fifty  years,  that  we  might  look  forward 
to  a  day  when  its  work  would  be  practically  ac- 
complished. At  the  beginning  of  this  century  it 


16  THE   GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

was  possible  for  an  Alexander  von  Humboldt  to 
take  a  survey  of  the  entire  domain  of  then  extant 
science.  Such  a  survey  would  be  impossible  for 
any  scientist  now,  even  if  gifted  with  more  than 
Humboldt's  powers.  Scarcely  any  specialist  of  to- 
day is  really  master  of  all  the  work  which  has  been 
done  in  his  own  comparatively  small  field.  Facts 
and  their  classification  have  been  accumulating  at 
such  a  rate,  that  nobody  seems  to  have  leisure  to 
recognize  the  relations  of  sub-groups  to  the  whole.  It 
is  as  if  both  in  Europe  and  America  individual 
workers  were  bringing  their  stones  to  one  great 
building  and  piling  them  on  and  fastening  them  down 
without  regard  to  any  general  plan  or  to  their 
individual  neighbour's  work;  only  where  some  one 
has  placed  a  great  corner-stone,  is  it  regarded,  and 
the  building  then  rises  on  this  firmer  foundation  more 
rapidly  than  at  other  points,  till  it  reaches  a  height  at 
which  it  is  stopped  for  want  of  side  support.  Yet 
this  great  structure,  the  proportions  of  which  are 
beyond  the  ken  of  any  individual  man,  possesses  a 
symmetry  and  unity  of  its  own,  notwithstanding  its 
haphazard  mode  of  construction.  This  symmetry 
and  unity  lies  in  scientific  method.  The  smallest 
group  of  facts,  if  properly  classified  and  logically  dealt 
with,  will  form  a  stone  which  has  its  proper  place  in 
the  great  building  of  knowledge,  wholly  independent 
of  the  individual  workman  who  has  shaped  it.  Even 
when  two  men  work  unwittingly  at  the  same  stone 
they  will  but  modify  and  correct  each  other's  angles. 
In  the  face  of  all  this  enormous  progress  of  modern 
science,  when  in  all  civilized  lands  men  are  applying 
the  scientific  method  to  natural,  historical,  and  mental 
facts,  we  have  yet  to  admit  that  the  goal  of  science  is 
and  must  be  infinitely  distant. 


INTRODUCTORY.  17 

Here,  too,  we  may  note  that  when  from  a  sufficient 
if  partial  classification  of  facts  a  simple  principle  has 
been  discovered  which  describes  the  relationship  and 
sequences  of  the   group,  then  this  principle  or  law 
itself  generally  leads  to  the  discovery  of  a  still  wider 
range'  of  hitherto  unregarded  phenomena  in  the  same 
or  associated  fields.     Every  great  advance  of  science 
opens  our  eyes  to  facts  which  we  had  failed  before  to 
observe,  and  makes  new  demands  on  our  powers  of 
interpretation.      This    extension  of  the    material  of 
science    into   regions   where   our   great-grandfathers 
could  see  nothing  at  all,  or  where  they  would  have 
declared  human  knowledge  impossible,  is  one  of  the 
most  remarkable  features  of  modern  progress.    Where 
they  interpreted  the  motion  of  the  planets  of  our  own 
system,  we  discuss  the  chemical  constitution  of  stars, 
many  of  which   did    not   exist   for   them,   for   their 
telescopes  could  not  reach  them.     Where  they  dis- 
covered the   circulation   of   the   blood,   we   see   the 
physical  conflict  of  living  poisons  within  the  blood, 
whose  battles  would  have  been  absurdities  for  them. 
Where  they  found  void  and  probably  demonstrated  to 
their  own  satisfaction  that  there  was  void,  we  conceive 
great  systems   in  rapid   motion  capable  of  carrying 
energy  through  brick  walls  as  light   passes  through 
glass.     Great  as  the  advance  of  scientific  knowledge 
has  been,  it  has  not  been  greater  than  the  growth  of 
the  material  to  be  dealt  with.     The  goal  of  science  is 
clear — it  is  nothing  short  of  the  complete  interpre- 
tation of  the  universe.     But  the  goal  is  an  ideal  one — 
it  marks  the  direction  in  which  we  move  and  strive, 
but  never  the  point  we  shall  actually  reach. 


1 8  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

§  6. — Science  and  Metaphysics. 

Now  I  want  to  draw  the  reader's  attention  to  two 
results  which  flow  from  the  above  considerations, 
namely :  that  the  material  of  science  is  coextensive 
with  the  whole  life,  physical  and  mental,  of  the 
universe,  and  furthermore  that  the  limits  to  our 
perception  of  the  universe  are  only  apparent,  not  real. 
It  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  the  universe  was  not 
the  same  for  our  great-grandfathers  as  it  is  for  us, 
and  that  in  all  probability  it  will  be  utterly  different  for 
our  great-grandchildren.  The  universe  is  a  variable 
quantity,  which  depends  upon  the  keenness  and  struc- 
ture of  our  organs  of  sense,  and  upon  the  fineness 
of  our  powers  and  instruments  of  observation.  We 
shall  see  more  clearly  the  important  bearing  of  this 
latter  remark  when  we  come  to  discuss  more  closely 
in  another  chapter  how  the  universe  is  largely  the 
construction  of  each  individual  mind.  For  the  present 
we  must  briefly  consider  the  former  remark,  which 
defines  the  unlimited  scope  of  science.  To  say  that 
there  are  certain  fields — for  example  metaphysics — from 
which  science  is  excluded,  wherein  its  methods  have 
no  application,  is  merely  to  say  that  the  rules  of 
methodical  observation  and  the  laws  of  logical  thought 
do  not  apply  to  the  facts,  if  any,  which  lie  within  such 
fields.  These  fields,  if  indeed  such  exist,  must  lie 
outside  any  intelligible  definition  which  can  be  given 
of  the  word  knowledge.  If  there  are  facts,  and 
sequences  to  be  observed  among  those  facts,  then  we 
have  all  the  requisites  of  scientific  classification  and 
knowledge.  If  there  are  no  facts,  or  no  sequences 
to  be  observed  among  them,  then  the  possibility  of 
all  knowledge  disappears.  The  greatest  assumption 
of  everyday  life — the  inference  which  the  meta- 


INTRODUCTORY.  19 

physicians  tell  us  is  wholly  beyond  science — namely, 
that  other  beings  have  consciousness  as  well  as 
ourselves,  seems  to  have  just  as  much  or  as  little 
scientific  validity  as  the  statement  that  an  earth-grown 
apple  would  fall  to  the  ground  if  carried  to  the  planet 
of  another  star.  Both  are  beyond  the  range  of  ex-  \ 
perimental  demonstration,  but  to  assume  uniformity  in  : 
the  characteristics  of  brain  'matter'  under  certain  condi- 
tions seems  as  scientific  as  to  assume  uniformity  in  the 
characteristics  of  stellar  *  matter.'  Both  are  only  work- 
ing hypotheses  and  valuable  in  so  far  as  they  simplify 
our  description  of  the  universe.  Yet  the  distinction 
between  science  and  metaphysics  is  often  insisted 
upon,  and  not  unadvisedly,  by  the  devotees  of  both. 
If  we  take  any  group  of  physical  or  biological  facts — 
say,  for  example,  electrical  phenomena  or  the  develop- 
ment of  the  ovum — we  shall  find  that,  though  phy- 
sicists or  biologists  may  differ  to  some  extent  in  their 
measurements  or  in  their  hypotheses,  yet  in  the 
fundamental  principles  and  sequences  the  professors 
of  each  individual  science  are  in  practical  agreement 
among  themselves.  A  similar  if  not.  yet  so  complete 
agreement  is  rapidly  springing  up  in  both  mental  and 
social  science,  where  the  facts  are  more  difficult  to 
classify  and  the  bias  of  individual  opinion  is  much 
stronger.  Our  more  thorough  classification,  however, 
of  the  facts  of  human  development,  our  more  accurate 
knowledge  of  the  early  history  of  human  societies,  of 
primitive  customs,  laws,  and  religions,  our  application 
of  the  principle  of  natural  selection  to  man  and  his 
communities,  are  converting  anthropology,  folklore, 
sociology,  and  psychology  into  true  sciences.  We 
begin  to  see  indisputable  sequences  in  groups  of  both 
mental  and  social  facts,  The  causes  which  favour  the 


20  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

growth  or  decay  of  human  societies  become  more 
obvious  and  more  the  subject  of  scientific  investi- 
gation. Mental  and  social  facts  are  thus  not  beyond 
the  range  of  scientific  treatment,  but  their  classifi- 
cation has  not  been  so  complete,  nor  for  obvious 
reasons  so  unprejudiced,  as  those  of  physical  or 
biological  phenomena. 

The  case  is  quite  different  with  metaphysics  and 
those  other  supposed  branches  of  human  knowledge 
which  claim  exemption  from  scientific  control.1  Either 
they  are  based  on  an  accurate  classification  of  facts, 
or  they  are  not.  But  if  their  classification  of  facts 
were  accurate,  the  application  of  the  scientific  method 
ought  to  lead  their  professors  to  a  practically  identical 
system.  Now  one  of  the  idiosyncrasies  of  meta- 
physicians lies  in  this  :  that  each  metaphysician  has 
his  own  system,  which  to  a  large  extent  excludes  that 
of  his  predecessors  and  colleagues.  Hence  we  must 
conclude  that  metaphysics  are  either  built  on  air  or 
on  quicksands — either  they  start  from  no  foundation 
in  facts  at  all,  or  the  superstructure  has  been  raised 
before  a  basis  has  been  found  in  the  accurate  classifica- 
tion of  facts.  I  want  to  lay  special  stress  on  this  point. 
There  is  no  short  cut  to  truth,  no  way  to  gain  a  know- 
ledge of  the  universe  except  through  the  gateway  of 
scientific  method.  The  hard  and  stony  path  of  classify  - 

1  It  is  perhaps  impossible  to  satisfactorily  define  the  metaphysician, 
but  the  meaning  attached  by  the  present  writer  to  the  term  will  become 
clearer  in  the  sequel.  It  is  here  used  to  denote  a  class  of  writers,  of 
whom  well-known  examples  are :  Kant,  in  his  later  uncritical  period 
(when  he  discovered  that  the  universe  was  created  in  order  that  man 
might  have  a  sphere  for  moral  action  !)  ;  the  post-Kantians  (notably 
Hegel  and  Schopenhauer),  and  their  numerous  English  disciples,  who 
"  explain  "  the  universe  without  having  even  an  3lementary  knowledge 
of  physical  science. 


INTRODUCTORY.  21 

ing  facts  and  reasoning  upon  them  is  the  only  way  to 
ascertain  truth.  It  is  the  reason  and  not  the  imagina- 
tion which  must  ultimately  be  appealed  to.  The  poet 
may  give  us  in  sublime  language  an  account  of  the 
origin  and  purport  of  the  universe,  but  in  the  end  it 
will  not  satisfy  our  aesthetic  judgment,  our  idea  of 
harmony  and  beauty,  like  the  few  facts  which  the 
scientist  may  venture  to  tell  us  in  the  same  field.  The 
one  will  agree  with  all  our  experiences  past  and  present, 
the  other  is  sure,  sooner  or  later,  to  contradict  our 
observation  because  it  is  a  dogma,  where  we  are  yet 
far  from  knowing  the  whole  truth.  Our  aesthetic 
judgment  demands  harmony  between  the  representa- 
tion and  the  represented,  and  in  this  sense  science  is 
often  more  artistic  than  modern  art. 

The  poet  is  a  valued  member  of  the  community,  for 
he  is  known  to  be  a  poet ;  his  value  will  increase  as  he 
grows  to  recognize  the  deeper  insight  into  nature  with 
which  modern  science  provides  him.  The  metaphy- 
sician is  a  poet,  often  a  very  great  one,  but  unfor- 
tunately he  is  not  known  to  be  a  poet,  because  he 
clothes  his  poetry  in  the  language  of  apparent  reason, 
and  hence  it  follows  that  he  is  liable  to  be  a  dangerous 
member  of  the  community.  The  danger  at  the  present 
time  that  metaphysical  dogmas  may  check  scientific 
research  is,  perhaps,  not  very  great.  The  day  has 
gone  by  when  the  Hegelian  philosophy  threatened  to 
strangle  infant  science  in  Germany  ; — that  it  begins  to 
languish  at  Oxford  is  a  proof  that  it  is  practically  dead 
in  the  country  of  its  birth.  The  day  has  gone  by  when 
philosophical  or  theological  dogmas  of  any  kind  can 
throw  back,  even  for  generations,  the  progress  of 
scientific  investigation.  There  is  no  restriction  now 
on  research  in  any  field,  or  on  the  publication  of  the 


22  THE  GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

truth  when  it  has  been  reached.  But  there  is  never- 
theless a  danger  which  we  cannot  afford  to  disregard, 
a  danger  which  retards  the  spread  of  scientific  know- 
ledge among  the  unenlightened,  and  which  flatters 
obscurantism  by  discrediting  the  scientific  method. 
There  is  a  certain  school  of  thought  which  finds  the 
laborious  process  by  which  science  reaches  truth  too 
irksome  ;  the  temperament  of  this  school  is  such  that 
it  demands  a  short  and  easy  cut  to  knowledge,  where 
knowledge  can  only  be  gained,  if  at  all,  by  the  long 
and  patient  toiling  of  many  groups  of  workers,  perhaps 
through  several  centuries.  There  are  various  fields  at 
the  present  day  wherein  mankind  is  ignorant,  and  the 
honest  course  for  us  is  simply  to  confess  our  ignorance. 
This  ignorance  may  arise  from  the  want  of  any  proper 
'  classification  of  facts,  or  because  supposed  facts  are 
themselves  inconsistent,  unreal  creations  of  man's  un- 
trained mind.  But  because  this  ignorance  is  frankly 
admitted  by  science,  an  attempt  is  made  to  wall  off 
these  fields  as  ground  whereon  science  has  no  business 
to  trespass,  where  the  scientific  method  is  of  no  avail. 
Wherever  science  has  succeeded  in  ascertaining  the 
truth,  there,  according  to  the  school  we  have  re- 
ferred to,  are  the  "  legitimate  problems  of  science." 
Wherever  science  is  yet  ignorant,  there  we  are  told 
its  method  is  inapplicable  ;  there  some  other  relation 
than  cause  and  effect  (than  the  same  sequence  recurring 
with  the  like  grouping  of  phenomena),  some  new,  but 
undefined  relationship  rules.  In  these  fields  we  are 
told  problems  become  philosophical  and  can  only 
be  treated  by  the  method  of  philosophy.  The  philo- 
sophical method  is  opposed  to  the  scientific  method  ; 
and  here  I  think  the  danger  I  have  referred  to  arises. 
We  have  defined  the  scientific  method  to  consist  in 


INTRODUCTORY.  23 

the  orderly  classification  of  facts  followed  by  the  f 
recognition  of  their  relationship  and  recurring  se- 
quences. The  scientific  judgment  is  the  judgment 
based  upon  this  recognition  and  free  from  personal 
bias.  If  this  were  the  philosophical  method  there 
would  be  no  need  of  further  discussion,  but  as  we 
are  told  the  subject-matter  of  philosophy  is  not  the 
"  legitimate  problem  of  science,"  the  two  methods  are 
presumably  not  identical.  Indeed  the  philosophical 
method  seems  based  upon  an  analysis  which  does 
not  start  with  the  classification  of  facts,  but  reaches  • 
its  judgments  by  some  process  of  internal  cogitation. 
It  is  therefore  dangerously  liable  to  the  influence  of 
individual  bias  ;  it  results,  as  experience  shows  us,  in 
an  endless  number  of  competing  and  contradictory 
systems.  '  It  is  because  the  so-called  philosophical 
method  does  not  lead,  like  the  scientific,  to  practical 
unanimity  of  judgments,  when  different  individuals 
approach  the  same  range  of  facts,1  that  science,  rather 
than  philosophy,  offers  the  better  training  for  modern 
citizenship. 

§  7. —  The  Ignorance  of  Science. 

It  must  not  be  supposed  that  science  for  a  moment 
denies  the  existence  of  some  of  the  problems  which  have 
hitherto  been  classed  as  philosophical  or  metaphysical 
On  the  contrary,  it  recognizes  that  a  great  variety  of 
physical  and  biological  phenomena  lead  directly  to 
these  problems.  But  it  asserts  that  the  methods 

1  This  statement  by  no  means  denies  the  existence  of  many  moot 
points,  unsettled  problems  in  science  ;  but  the  genuine  scientist  admits 
that  they  are  unsolved.  As  a  rule  they  lie  just  on  the  frontier  line 
between  knowledge  and  ignorance,  where  the  outposts  of  science  are 
being  pushed  forward  into  unoccupied  and  difficult  country. 


24  THE   GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

hitherto  applied  to  these  problems  have  been  futile, 
because  they  have  been  unscientific.  The  classifica- 
tions of  facts  hitherto  made  by  the  system-mongers 
have  been  hopelessly  inadequate  or  hopelessly  preju- 
diced. Until  the  scientific  study  of  psychology,  both 
by  observation  and  experiment,  has  advanced  im- 
mensely beyond  its  present  limits — and  this  may  take 
generations  of  work — science  can  only  answer  to  the 
great  majority  of  '  metaphysical '  problems,  "  I  am 
ignorant."  Meanwhile  it  is  idle  to  be  impatient  or  to 
indulge  in  system-making.  The  cautious  and  laborious 
classification  of  facts  must  have  proceeded  much  further 
than  at  present,  before  the  time  will  be  ripe  for  drawing 
conclusions. 

Science  stands  now  with  regard  to  the  problems  of 
life  and  mind  in  much  the  same  position  as  it  stood 
with  regard  to  cosmical  problems  in  the  seventeenth 
century.  Then  the  system-mongers  were  the  theo- 
logians, who  declared  that  cosmical  problems  were  not 
the  "  legitimate  problems  of  science."  It  was  vain  for 
Galilei  to  assert  that  the  theologians'  classification  of 
facts  was  hopelessly  inadequate.  In  solemn  congrega- 
tion assembled  they  settled  that : — 

"  The  doctrine  that  the  earth  is  neither  the  centre  of 
the  universe  nor  immovable,  but  moves  even  with  a  daily 
rotation,  is  absurd,  and  both  philosophically  and  theo- 
logically false ',  and  at  the  least  an  error  of  faith"  * 

It  took  nearly  two  hundred  years  to  convince  the 
whole  theological  world  that  cosmical  problems  were 
the  legitimate  problems  of  science  and  science  alone, 

1  "  Terram  non  esse  centrum  Mimdi,  nee  immobilem,  sed  moveri  motu 
etiam  diurno,  est  item  propositio  absurda,  et  falsa  in  Philosophia,  et  Theo- 
ligice  considerata,  ad  minus  erronea  in  fide"  (Congregation  of  Prelates 
and  Cardinals,  June  22,  1633). 


INTRODUCTORY.  2$ 

for  in  1819  the  books  of  Galilei,  Copernicus,  and 
Keppler  were  still  upon  the  index  of  forbidden  books, 
and  not  till  1822  was  a  decree  issued  allowing  books 
teaching  the  motion  of  the  earth  about  the  sun  to  be 
printed  and  published  in  Rome ! 

I  have  cited  this  memorable  example  of  the  absurdity 
which  arises  from  trying  to  pen  science  into  a  limited 
field  of  thought,  because  it  seems  to  me  exceedingly 
suggestive  of  what  must  follow  again,  if  any  attempt, 
philosophical  or  theological,  be  made  to  define  the 
"  legitimate  problems  of  science."  Wherever  there  is 
the  slightest  possibility  for  the  human  mind  to  knoiv, 
there  is  a  legitimate  problem  of  science.  Outside  the 
field  of  actual  knowledge  can  only  lie  a  region  of 
the  vaguest  opinion  and  imagination,  to  which  un- 
fortunately men  too  often,  but  still  with  decreasing 
prevalence,  pay  higher  respect  than  to  knowledge. 

We  must  here  investigate  a  little  more  closely  what 
the  man  of  science  means  when  he  says  :  "  Here  I  am 
ignorant?  In  the  first  place  he  does  not  mean  that 
the  method  of  science  is  necessarily  inapplicable,  and 
accordingly  that  some  other  method  is  to  be  sought 
for.  In  the  next  place,  if  the  ignorance  really  arises 
from  the  inadequacy  of  the  scientific  method,  then  we 
may  be  quite  sure  that  no  other  method  whatsoever 
will  reach  the  truth.  The  ignorance  of  science  means 
the  enforced  ignorance  of  mankind.  I  should  be 
sorry  myself  to  assert  that  there  is  any  field  of  either 
mental  or  physical  perceptions  which  science  may  not 
in  the  long  course  of  centuries  enlighten.  Who  can 
give  us  the  assurance  that  the  fields  already  occupied 
by  science  are  alone  those  in  which  knowledge  is 
possible?  Who,  in  the  words  of  Galilei,  is  willing  to 
set  limits  to  the  human  intellect  ?  Jt  is  true  that  this 


26  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

view  is  not  held  by  several  leading  scientists,  both  in 
this  country  and  Germany.  They  are  not  content  with 
saying,  "  We  are  ignorant,"  but  they  add,  with  regard 
to  certain  classes  of  facts,  "  Mankind  must  always  be 
ignorant."  Thus  in  England  Professor  Huxley  has 
invented  the  term  Agnostic,  not  so  much  for  those 
who  are  ignorant  as  for  those  who  limit  the  possibility 
of  knowledge  in  certain  fields.  In  Germany  Professor 
E.duBois-Reymond  has  raised  the  cry:  "Ignorabimus" 
— "We  shall  be  ignorant,"  and  both  his  brother  and  he 
have  undertaken  the  difficult  task  of  demonstrating 
that  with  regard  to  certain  problems  human  knowledge 
is  impossible.1  We  must,  however,  note  that  in  these 
cases  we  are  not  concerned  with  the  limitation  of  the 
scientific  method,  but  with  the  denial  of  the  possibility 
that  any  method  whatever  can  lead  to  knowledge.  Now 
I  venture  to  think  that  there  is  great  danger  in  this 
cry:  "We  shall  be  ignorant."  To  cry  "We  are 
ignorant,"  is  safe  and  healthy,  but  the  attempt  to 
demonstrate  an  endless  futurity  of  ignorance  appears 
a  modesty  which  approaches  despair.  Conscious  of 
the  past  great  achievements  and  the  present  restless 
activity  of  science,  may  we  not  do  better  to  accept  as 
our  watchword  that  of  Galilei :  "Who  is  willing  to  set 
limits  to  the  human  intellect?" — interpreting  it  by 
what  evolution  has  taught  us  of  the  continual  growth 
of  man's  intellectual  powers. 

Scientific  ignorance  may,  as  I  have  remarked 
(p.  22),  either  arise  from  an  insufficient  classification 
of  facts,  or  be  due  to  the  unreality  of  the  facts  with 
which  science  has  been  called  upon  to  deal.  Let  us 
take  for  example  a  number  of  fields  of  thought  which 

1  See  especially  Paul  du  Bois-Reymoncl :  Ueber  die  Gnmdlagen 
der  Erkenntniss  in  den  exacten  Wissenschaften.  Tubingen,  1890. 


INTRODUCTORY.  2/ 

were  very  prominent  in  mediaeval  times,  such  as 
alchemy,  astrology,  witchcraft.  In  the  fifteenth  cen- 
tury nobody  doubted  the  "  facts  "  of  astrology  and 
witchcraft.  Men  were  ignorant  as  to  how  the  stars 
exerted  their  influence  for  good  or  ill  ;  they  did  not 
know  the  exact  mechanical  process  by  which  all  the 
milk  in  a  village  was  turned  blue  by  a  witch.  But  for 
them  it  was  nevertheless  a  fact  that  the  stars  did 
influence  human  lives,  and  a  fact  that  the  witch  had 
the  power  of  turning  the  milk  blue.  Have  we  solved 
the  problems  of  astrology  and  witchcraft  to-day  ? 

Do  we  now  know  how  the  stars  influence  human 
lives,  or  how  witches  turn  milk  blue?  Not  in  the 
least.  We  have  learnt  to  look  upon  the  facts  them- 
selves as  unreal,  as  vain  imaginings  of  the  untrained 
human  mind  ;  we  have  learnt  that  they  could  not  be 
described  scientifically  because  they  involved  notions 
which  were  in  themselves  contradictory  and  absurd. 
With  alchemy  the  case  was  somewhat  different. 
Here  a  false  classification  of  real  facts  was  combined 
with  inconsistent  sequences — that  is,  sequences  not 
deduced  by  a  rational  method.  So  soon  as  science 
entered  the  field  of  alchemy  with  a  true  classification 
and  a  true  method,  alchemy  was  converted  into 
chemistry  and  became  an  important  branch  of 
human  knowledge.  Now  it  will,  I  think,  be  found 
that  the  fields  of  inquiry,  where  science  has  not  yet 
penetrated  and  where  the  scientist  still  confesses 
ignorance,  are  very  like  the  alchemy,  astrology,  and 
witchcraft  of  the  Middle  Ages.  Either  they  involve 
facts  which  are  in  themselves  unreal — conceptions 
which  are  self-contradictory  and  absurd,  and  there- 
fore incapable  of  analysis  by  the  scientific  or  any 
other  method, — or,  on  the  other  hand,  our  ignorance 


28  THE  GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

arises  from  an  inadequate  classification  and  a  neg- 
lect of  scientific  method. 

This  is  the  actual  state  of  the  case  with  those 
mental  and  spiritual  phenomena  which  are  said  to 
lie  outside  the  proper  scope  of  science,  or  which 
appear  to  be  disregarded  by  scientific  men.  No 
better  example  can  be  taken  than  the  range  of  pheno- 
mena which  are  entitled  Spiritualism.  Here  science  is 
asked  to  analyze  a  series  of  facts  which  are  to  a  great 
extent  unreal,  which  arise  from  the  vain  imaginings 
of  untrained  minds  and  from  atavistic  tendencies 
to  superstition.  So  far  as  the  facts  are  of  this  cha- 
racter, no  account  can  be  given  of  them,  because,  like 
the  witch's  supernatural  capacity,  their  unreality  will 
be  found  at  bottom  to  make  them  self-contradictory. 
Combined,  however,  with  the  unreal  series  of  facts 
are  probably  others,  connected  with  hypnotic  condi- 
tions, which  are  real  and  only  incomprehensible  be- 
cause there  is  as  yet  scarcely  any  intelligent  classifica- 
tion or  true  application  of  scientific  method.  The 
former  class  of  facts  will,  like  astrology,  never  be 
reduced  to  law,  but  will  one  day  be  recognized  as 
absurd ;  the  other,  like  alchemy,  may  grow  step  by  step 
into  an  important  branch  of  science.  Whenever,  there- 
fore, we  are  tempted  to  desert  the  scientific  method 
of  seeking  truth,  whenever  the  silence  of  science 
suggests  that  some  other  gateway  must  be  sought  to 
knowledge,  let  us  inquire  first  whether  the  elements 
of  the  problem,  of  whose  solution  we  are  ignorant, 
may  not  after  all,  like  the  facts  of  witchcraft,  arise 
from  a  superstition,  and  be  self-contradictory  and 
incomprehensible  because  they  are  unreal. 

If  on  inquiry  we  ascertain  that  the  facts  cannot 
possibly  be  of  this  class,  we  must  then  remember  that 


INTRODUCTORY*  29 

it  may  require  long  ages  of  increasing  toil  and  in- 
vestigation before  the  classification  of  the  facts  can 
be  so  complete  that  science  can  express  a  definite 
judgment  on  their  relationship.  Let  us  suppose  that 
the  Emperor  Karl  V.  had  said  to  the  learned  of  his 
day :  "  I  want  a  method  by  which  I  can  send  a 
message  in  a  few  seconds  to  that  new  world,  which 
my  mariners  take  weeks  in  reaching.  Put  your  heads 
together  and  solve  the  problem."  Would  they  not 
undoubtedly  have  replied  that  the  problem  was  im- 
possible ?  To  propose  it  would  have  seemed  as 
ridiculous  to  them  as  the  suggestion  that  science 
should  straightway  solve  many  problems  of  life  and 
mind  seems  to  the  learned  of  to-day.  It  required 
centuries  spent  in  the  discovery  and  classification  of 
new  facts  before  the  Atlantic  cable  became  a  possi- 
bility. It  may  require  the  like  or  even  a  longer  time 
to  unriddle  those  psychical  and  biological  enigmas  to 
which  I  have  referred  ;  but  he  who  declares  that  they 
can  never  be  solved  by  the  scientific  method  is  to 
my  mind  as  rash  as  the  man  .of  the  early  sixteenth 
century  would  have  been  had  he  declared  it  utterly 
impossible  that  the  problem  of  talking  across  the 
Atlantic  Ocean  should  ever  be  solved. 

§  8. —  The  Wide  Domain  of  Science. 

If  I  have  put  the  case  of  science  at  all  correctly, 
the  reader  will  have  recognized  that  modern  science 
does  much  more  than  demand  that  it  shall  be  left  in 
undisturbed  possession  of  what  the  theologian  and 
metaphysician  please  to  term  its  "legitimate  field."  It 
claims  that  the  whole  range  of  phenomena,  mental  as 
well  as  physical — the  entire  universe— is  its  field.  It 
asserts  that  the  scientific  method  is  the  sole  gateway 


36  tHE   GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

to  the  whole  region  of  knowledge.  The  word  science 
is  here  used  in  no  narrow  sense,  but  applies  to  all 
reasoning  about  facts  which  proceeds,  from  their 
accurate  classification,  to  the  appreciation  of  their 
relationship  and  sequence.  The  touchstone  of 
science  is  the  universal  validity  of  its  results  for 
all  normally  constituted  and  duly  instructed  minds 
Because  the  glitter  of  the  great  metaphysical  systems 
becomes  dross  when  tried  by  this  touchstone,  we  are 
compelled  to  classify  them  as  interesting  works  of  the 
imagination,  and  not  as  solid  contributions  to  human" 
knowledge. 

Although  science  claims  the  whole  universe  as 
its  field,  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  it  has  reached, 
or  ever  can  reach,  complete  knowledge  in  every 
department.  Far  from  this,  it  confesses  that  its 
ignorance  is  more  widely  extended  than  its  know- 
ledge. In  this  very  confession  of  ignorance,  however, 
it  finds  a  safeguard  for  future  progress.  Science 
cannot  give  its  consent  to  man's  development  being 
some  day  checked  again  by  the  barriers  which 
dogma  and  myth  would  wish  to  erect  round  territory 
that  science  has  not  yet  effectually  occupied.  It 
cannot  allow  theologian  or  philosopher,  those  Portu- 
guese of  the  intellect,  to  establish  a  right  to  the 
foreshore  of  ignorance,  and  so  to  hinder  the  settle- 
ment in  due  time  of  vast  and  yet  unknown  conti- 
nents of  thought.  In  the  like  barriers  erected  in  the 
past  science  finds  some  of  the  greatest  difficulties  in 
the  way  of  intellectual  progress  and  social  advance 
at  the  present.  It  is  the  want  of  impersonal  judg- 
ment, of  scientific  method,  and  of  accurate  insight 
into  facts,  due  largely  to  a  non-scientific  training, 
which  renders  clear  thinking  so  rare,  and  random  and 


INTRODUCTORY.  31 

irresponsible  judgments  so  common,  in  the  mass  of 
our  citizens  to-day.  Yet  these  citizens,  owing  to  the 
growth  of  democracy,  have  graver  problems  to  settle 
than  probably  any  which  have  confronted  their  fore- 
fathers since  the  days  of  the  Revolution. 

§  9. — The  Second  Claim  of  Science. 

Hitherto  the  sole  ground  on  which  we  have  con- 
sidered the  appeal  of  modern  science  to  the  citizen  is 
the  indirect  influence  it  has  upon  conduct  owing  to 
the  more  efficient  mental  training  which  it  provides. 
But  we  have  further  to  recognize  that  science  can  on 
occasion  adduce  facts  having  far  more  direct  bearing 
on  social  problems  than  any  theory  of  the  state  pro- 
pounded by  the  philosophers  from  the  days  of  Plato 
to  those  of  Hegel.  I  cannot  bring  home  to  the  reader 
the  possibility  of  this,  better  than  by  citing  some  of 
the  conclusions  to  which  the  theory  of  heredity  elabo- 
rated by  the  German  biologist  Weismann  introduces 
us.  Weismann's  theory  lies  on  the  borderland  of 
scientific  knowledge;  his  results  are  still  open  to  dis- 
cussion, his  conclusions  to  modification.1  But  to 
indicate  the  manner  in  which  science  can  directly 
influence  conduct,  we  may  assume  for  the  time  being 
Weismann's  main  conclusions  to  be  correct.  One  of 
the  chief  features  of  his  theory  is  the  non-inheritance 

1  His  theory  of  the  "  continuity  of  the  germ  plasm  "  is  in  many  respects 
open  to  question,  but  his  conclusion  as  to  acquired  characteristics  being 
uninherited  stands  on  firmer  ground.  See  Weismann :  Essays  on 
Heredity  and  Kindred  Biological  Problems,  Oxford,  1889.  A  good 
criticism  will  be  found  in  C.  LI.  Morgan's  Animal  Life  and  Intelli- 
gence, chap.  v.  A  summary  in  W.  P.  Ball's  Are  the  Effects  of  Use 
and  Disuse  Inherited?  The  reader  should  also  consult  P.  Geddes  and 
J.  A.  Thomson,  The  Evolution  of  Sex,  and  a  long  discussion  in 
Nature,  vols.  xl.  and  xli.  (mb  indice,  Weismann,  Heredity). 


32  THE   GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

by  the  offspring  of  characteristics  acquired  by  the 
parents  in  the  course  of  life.  Thus  good  or  bad 
habits  acquired  by  the  father  or  mother  in  their  life- 
time are  not  inherited  by  their  children.  The  effects 
of  special  training  or  of  education  on  the  parents 
have  no  direct  influence  on  the  child  before  birth. 
The  parents  are  merely  trustees  who  hand  down 
their  commingled  stocks  to  their  offspring.  From  a 
bad  stock  can  come  only  bad  offspring,  and  if  a 
member  of  such  a  stock  is,  owing  to  special  training 
and  education,  an  exception  to  his  family,  his  off- 
spring will  still  be  born  with  the  old  taint.1  Now  this 
conclusion  of  Weismann's — if  it  be  valid,  and  all  we 
can  say  at  present  is  that  the  arguments  in  favour  of 
it  are  remarkably  strong — radically  affects  our  judg- 
ment on  the  moral  conduct  of  the  individual,  and  on 
the  duties  of  the  state  and  society  towards  their 
degenerate  members.  No  degenerate  and  feeble 
stock  will  ever  be  converted  into  healthy  and 
sound  stock  by  the  accumulated  effects  of  education, 
good  laws,  and  sanitary  surroundings.  Such  means 
may  render  the  individual  members  of  the  stock 
passable  if  not  strong  members  of  society,  but  the 
same  process  will  have  to  be  gone  through  again  and 
again  with  their  offspring,  and  this  in  ever-widening 
circles,  if  the  stock,  owing  to  the  conditions  in  which 
society  has  placed  it,  is  able  to  increase  in  numbers. 
The  removal  of  that  process  of  natural  selection 
which  in  the  struggle  for  existence  crushed  out  feeble 
and  degenerate  stocks,  may  be  a  real  danger  to 

1  Class,  poverty,  localization  do  much  to  approximately  isolate  stock, 
to  aggregate  the  unfit  even  in  modern  civilization.  The  mingling  of 
good  and  bad  stock  due  to  dispersion  leads  solely  to  panmixia^  it 
degenerates  the  good  as  much  as  it  improves  the  bad. 


INTRODUCTORY.  33 

society,  if  society  relies  solely  on  changed  environment  \ 
for  converting  its  inherited  bad  into  an  inheritable 
good.  If  society  is  to  shape  its  own  future — if  we 
are  to  replace  the  stern  processes  of  natural  law, 
which  have  raised  us  to  our  present  high  standard  of 
civilization,  by  milder  methods  of  eliminating  the 
unfit — then  we  must  be  peculiarly  cautious  that  in 
following  our  strong  social  instincts  we  do  not  at  the 
same  time  weaken  society  by  rendering  the  propa- 
gation of  bad  stock  more  and  more  easy. 

If  this  theory  of  Weismann's  be  correct — if  the  bad 
man  can  by  the  influence  of  education  and  surround- 
ings be  made  good,  but  the  bad  stock  can  never  be 
converted  into  good  stock — then  we  see  how  grave  a 
responsibility  is  cast  at  the  present  day  upon  every 
citizen,  who  directly  or  indirectly  has  to  consider  pro- 
blems relating  to  the  state  endowment  of  education, 
the  revision  and  administration  of  the  Poor  Law,  and, 
above  all,  the  conduct  of  public  and  private  charities 
annually  disposing  of  immense  resources.  In  all 
problems  of  this  kind  the  blind  social  instinct  and 
the  individual  bias  at  present  form  extremely  strong 
factors  of  our  judgment.  Yet  these  very  problems 
are  just  those  which,  affecting  the  whole  future  of  our 
society,  its  stability  and  its  efficiency,  require  us,  as 
good  citizens,  above  all  to  understand  and  obey  the 
laws  of  healthy  social  development. 

The  example  we  have  considered  will  not  be  futile, 
nor  its  lessons  worthless,  should  Weismann's  views  after 
all  be  inaccurate.  It  is  clear  that  in  social  problems 
of  the  kind  I  have  referred  to,  the  laws  of  heredity, 
whatever  they  may  be,  must  profoundly  influence  our 
judgment.  The  conduct  of  parent  to  child,  and  of 
society  to  its  anti-social  members,  can  never  be  placed 

4 


34  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

on  a  sound  and  permanent  basis  without  regard  to 
what  science  has  to  tell  us  on  the  fundamental  pro- 
blems of  inheritance.  The  "  philosophical  "  method 
can  never  lead  to  a  real  theory  of  morals.  Strange  as 
it  may  seem,  the  laboratory  experiments  of  a  biologist 
may  have  greater  weight  than  all  the  theories  of  the 
state  from  Plato  to  Hegel !  The  scientific  classification 
of  facts,  biological  or  historical,  the  observation  of  their 
correlation  and  sequence,  the  resulting  absolute,  as 
opposed  to  the  individual  judgment — these  are  the  sole 
means  by  which  we  can  reach  truth  in  such  a  vital 
social  question  as  that  of  heredity.  In  these  con- 
siderations alone  there  appears  to  be  sufficient  justi- 
fication for  the  national  endowment  of  science,  and 
for  the  universal  training  of  our  citizens  in  scientific 
methods  of  thought.  Each  one  of  us  is  now  called 
upon  to  give  a  judgment  upon  an  immense  variety 
of  problems,  crucial  for  our  social  gxistence.  If  that 
judgment  confirms  measures  and  conduct  tending  to 
the  increased  welfare  of  society,  then  it  may  be  termed 
a  moral,  or,  better,  a  social  judgment.  It  follows,  then, 
that  to  ensure  a  judgment's  being  moral,  method  and 
knowledge  are  essential  to  its  formation.  It  cannot 
be  too  often  insisted  upon  that  the  formation  of  a 
moral  judgment — that  is,  one  which  the  individual  is 
reasonably  certain  will  tend  to  social  welfare — does  not 
depend  solely  on  the  readiness  to  sacrifice  individual 
gain  or  comfort,  to  act  unselfishly  :  it  depends  in  the 
first  place  on  knowledge  and  method.  The  first  de- 
mand of  the  state  upon  the  individual  is  not  for  self- 
sacrifice,  but  for  self-development.  The  man  who 
gives  a  thousand  pounds  to  a  vast  and  vague  scheme 
of  charity,  may  or  may  not  be  acting  socially  ;  his  self- 
sacrifice,  if  it  be  such,  proves  nothing ;  but  the  man 


INTRODUCTORY.  35 

who  gives  a  vote,  either  directly  or  even  indirectly,  in 
the  choice  of  a  representative,  after  forming  a  judgment 
based  upon  knoivledge  is  undoubtedly  acting  socially, 
and  is  fulfilling  a  higher  standard  of  citizenship. 

§  lo.—T/ie  Third  Claim  of  Science. 

Thus  far  I  have  been  examining  more  particularly 
the  action  of  science  with  regard  to  social  problems. 
I  have  endeavoured  to  point  out  that  it  cannot  legiti- 
mately be  excluded  from  any  field  of  investigation 
after  truth,  and  that,  further,  not  only  is  its  method 
essential  to  good  citizenship,  but  that  its  results  bear 
closely  on  the  practical  treatment  of  many  social 
difficulties.  In  this  I  have  endeavoured  to  justify 
the  state  endowment  and  teaching  of  pure  science  as 
apart  from  its  technical  applications.  If  in  this  justi- 
fication I  have  laid  most  stress  on  the  advantages  of 
scientific  method  —  on  the  training  which  science 
gives  us  in  the  appreciation  of  evidence,  in  the  classi- 
fication of  facts,  and  in  the  elimination  of  personal 
bias,  in  all  that  may  be  termed  exactness  of  mind — 
we  must  still  remember  that  ultimately  the  direct  in- 
fluence of  pure  science  on  practical  life  is  enormous. 
The  observations  of  Newton  on  the  relation  between 
the  motions  of  a  falling  stone  and  the  moon,  of  Galvani 
on  the  convulsive  movements  of  frogs'  legs  in  contact 
with  iron  and  copper,  of  Darwin  on  the  adaptation  of 
woodpeckers,  of  tree-frogs,  and  of  seeds  to  their  sur- 
roundings, of  KirchhofT  on  certain  lines  which  occur  in 
the  spectrum  of  sunlight,  of  other  investigators  on  the 
life-history  of  bacteria — these  and  kindred  observations 
have  not  only  revolutionized  our  conception  of  the 
universe,  but  they  have  revolutionized,  or  are  revo- 
lutionizing, our  practical  life,  our  means  of  transit, 


36  THE   GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

our  social  conduct,  our  treatment  of  disease.  What 
at  the  instant  of  its  discovery  appears  to  be  only  a 
sequence  of  purely  theoretical  interest,  becomes  the 
basis  of  discoveries  which  in  the  end  profoundly 
modify  the  conditions  of  human  life.  It  is  impossible 
to  say  of  any  result  of  pure  science,  that  it  will  not 
some  day  be  the  starting-point  of  wide-reaching 
technical  applications.  The  frog's  legs  of  Galvani 
and  the  Atlantic  cable  seem  wide  enough  apart,  but 
the  former  was  the  starting-point  of  the  series  of 
investigations  which  ended  in  the  latter.  In  the 
recent  discovery  of  Hertz  that  the  action  of  electro- 
magnetism  is  propagated  in  waves  like  light — in  his 
confirmation  of  Maxwell's  theory  that  light  is  only 
a  special  phase  of  electro-magnetic  action — we  have  a 
result  which,  if  of  striking  interest  to  pure  science, 
seems  yet  to  have  no  immediate  practical  application. 
But  that  man  would  indeed  be  a  bold  dogmatist  who 
would  venture  to  assert  that  the  results  which  may 
ultimately  flow  from  this  discovery  of  Hertz's  will  not, 
in  a  generation  or  two,  do  more  to  revolutionize  life 
than  the  frog's  legs  of  Galvani  had  done  when  they 
had  led  to  the  perfection  of  the  electric  telegraph. 

§  1 1 . — Science  and  the  Imagination, 
There  is  another  aspect  from  which  it  is  right 
that  we  should  regard  pure  science — one  that  makes 
no  appeal  to  its  utility  in  practical  life,  but  touches  a 
side  of  our  nature  which  the  reader  may  have  thought 
that  I  have  entirely  neglected.  There  is  an  element 
in  our  being  which  is  not  satisfied  by  the  formal  pro- 
cesses of  reasoning ;  it  is  the  imaginative  or  aesthetic 
side,  the  side  to  which  the  poets  and  philosophers 
appeal,  and  one  which  science  cannot,  to  be  scientific, 


INTRODUCTORY  3? 

disregard.  We  have  seen  that  the  imagination  must 
not  replace  the  reason  in  the  deduction  of  relation 
and-  law  from  classified  facts.  But,  none  the  less, 
disciplined  imagination  has  been  at  the  bottom  of  all 
great  scientific  discoveries.  All  great  scientists  have, 
in  a  certain  sense,  been  great  artists  ;  the  man  with 
no  imagination  may  collect  facts,  but  he^cannot  make 
great  discoveries.  If  I  were  compelled  to  name  the 
Englishmen  who  during  our  generation  have  had  the 
widest  imaginations  and  exercised  them  most  bene- 
ficially, I  think  I  should  put  the  novelists  and  poets 
on  one  side  and  say  Michael  Faraday  and  Charles 
Darwin.  Now  it  is  very  needful  to  understand  the 
exact  part  imagination  plays  in  pure  science.  We 
can,  perhaps,  best  achieve  this  result  by  considering 
the  following  proposition  :  Pure  science  has  a  further 
strong  claim  upon  us  on  account  of  the  exercise  it 
gives  to  the  imaginative  faculties  and  the  gratification 
it  provides  for  the  aesthetic  judgment.  The  exact 
meaning  of  the  terms  "  scientific  fact "  and  "  scientific 
law "  will  be  considered  in  later  chapters,  but  for 
the  present  let  us  suppose  an  elaborate  classification 
of  such  facts  has  been  made,  and  their  relationships 
and  sequences  carefully  traced.  What  is  the  next 
stage  in  the  process  of  scientific  investigation  ?  Un- 
doubtedly it  is  the  use  of  the  imagination.  The  dis- 
covery of  some  single  statement,  some  brief  formula 
from  which  the  whole  group  of  facts  is  seen  to  flow, 
is  the  work  not  of  the  mere  cataloguer,  but  of  the  man 
endowed  with  creative  imagination.  The  single  state- 
ment, the  brief  formula,  the  words  of  which  replace  in 
our  minds  a  wide  range  of  relationships  between 
isolated  phenomena,  is  what  we  term  a  scientific  law. 
Such  a  law,  relieving  our  memory  from  the  burden  of 


38  THE  GRAMMAk  OF   SCIENCE. 

individual  sequences,  enables  us,  with  the  minimum  of 
intellectual  fatigue,  to  grasp  a  vast  complexity  of 
natural  or  social  phenomena.  The  discovery  of  law 
is  therefore  the  pecul'ir  function  of  the  creative  imagi- 
nation. But  this  imagination  has  to  be  a  disciplined 
one.  It  has  in  the  first  place  to  appreciate  the  whole 
range  of  facts,  which  require  to  be  resumed  in  a  single 
statement ;  and  then  when  the  law  is  reached — often 
by  what  seems  solely  the  inspired  imagination  of 
genius — it  must  be  tested  and  criticised  by  its  dis- 
coverer in  every  conceivable  way,  till  he  is  certain 
that  the  imagination  has  not  played  him  false,  and 
that  his  law  is  in  real  agreement  with  the  whole  group 
of  phenomena  which  it  resumes.  Herein  lies  the  key- 
note to  the  scientific  use  of  the  imagination.  Hundreds 
of  men  have  allowed  their  imagination  to  solve  the 
universe,  but  the  men  who  have  contributed  to  our 
real  understanding  of  natural  phenomena  have  been 
those  who  were  unstinting  in  their  application  of 
criticism  to  the  product  of  their  imaginations.  It  is 
such  criticism  which  is  the  essence  of  the  scientific  use 
of  the  imagination,  which  is,  indeed,  the  very  life-blood 
of  science.1 

No  less  an  authority  than  Faraday  writes  : — 
"  The  world  little  knows  how  many  of  the  thoughts 
and  theories  which  have  passed  through  the  mind  of 
a  scientific  investigator  have  been  crushed  in  silence 
and  secrecy  by  his  own  severe  criticism  and  adverse 
examination  ;  that  in  the  most  successful  instances 
not  a  tenth  of  the  suggestions,  the  hopes,  the  wishes, 
the  preliminary  conclusions  have  been  realized." 

1  "  La  critique  est  la  vie  de  la  science"  says  Victor  Cousin. 


INTRODUCTORY.  39 

§  12. — The  Method  of  Science  Illustrated. 

The  reader  must  not  think  that  I  am  painting  any 
ideal  or  purely  theoretical  method  of  scientific  dis- 
covery. He  will  find  the  process  described  above 
accurately  depicted  by  Darwin  himself  in  the  account 
he  gives  us  of  his  discovery  of  the  law  of  natural 
selection.  After  his  return  to  England  in  1837,  he 
tells  us,1  it  appeared  to  him  that : — 

"  By  collecting  all  facts  which  bore  in  any  way  on  the 
variation  of  animals  and  plants  under  domestication 
and  nature,  some  light  might  perhaps  be  thrown  on 
the  whole  subject.  My  first  note-book  was  opened  in 
July,  1837.  I  worked  on  true  Baconian  principles,2 
and,  without  any  theory,  collected  facts  on  a  wholesale 
scale,  more  especially  with  respect  to  domesticated 
productions,  by  printed  enquiries,  by  conversation 
with  skilful  breeders  and  gardeners,  and  by  extensive 
reading.  When  I  see  the  list  of  books  of  all  kinds 
which  I  read  and  abstracted,  including  whole  series 

1  The  Life  and  Letters  of  Charles  Darwin,  vol.  i.  p.  83. 

2  It  is  from  men  like  Laplace  and  Darwin,  who  have  devoted  their 
lives  to  natural  science,  rather  than  from  workers  in  the  pure  field  of 
conception,  like  Mill  and  Stanley  Jevons,  that  we  must  seek  for  a  true 
estimate   of  the   Baconian   method.     Beside  Darwin's  words  we  may 
place  those  of  Laplace  on  Bacon  : — 

"  II  a  donne  pour  la  recherche  de  la  verite,  le  precepte  et  non  1'ex. 
emple.  Mais  en  insistant  avec  toute  la  force  de  la  raison  et  de  1'eloquence, 
sur  la  necessite  d'abandonner  les  subtilites  insignifiantes  de  1'ecole, 
pour  se  livrer  aux  observations  et  aux  experiences,  et  en  indiquant  la 
vraie  methode  de  s'elever  aux  causes  generates  des  phenomenes,  ce 
grand  philosophe  a  contribue  aux  progres  immenses  que  1'esprit  humain 
a  faits  dans  le  beau  siecle  oil  il  a  termine  sa  carriere  "  ( Theorie  analytique 
des  Probability's ,  QEuvres  T.  vii.  p.  clvi.).  The  carpenter  who  uses  a 
tool  is  a  better  judge  of  its  efficiency  than  the  smith  who  forges  it.  For 
a  good  sketch  of  the  estimation  in  which  Bacon  was  held  by  his  scientific 
contemporaries  see  the  introduction  to  Prof.  Fowler's  edition  of  the 
Novum  Organum. 


40  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

of  Journals  and  Transactions,  I  am  surprised  at  my 
own  industry.  I  soon  perceived  that  selection  was 
the  keystone  of  man's  success  in  making  useful  races 
of  animals  and  plants.  But  how  selection  could  be 
applied  to  organisms  living  in  a  state  of  nature  re- 
mained for  some  time  a  mystery  to  me." 

Here  we  have  Darwin's  scientific  classification  of 
facts,  what  he  himself  terms  his  "  systematic  inquiry." 
Upon  the  basis  of  this  systematic  inquiry  comes  the 
search  for  a  law.  This  is  the  work  of  the  imagina- 
tion ;  the  inspiration  in  Darwin's  case  being  ap- 
parently due  to  a  perusal  of  Malthus'  Essay  on  Popula- 
tion. But  Darwin's  imagination  was  of  the  disciplined 
scientific  sort.  Like  Turgot,  he  knew  that  if  the  first 
thing  is  to  invent  a  system,  then  the  second  is  to  be 
disgusted  with  it.  Accordingly  there  followed  the 
period  of  self-criticism,  which  lasted  four  or  five  years, 
and  it  was  no  less  than  nineteen  years  before  he  gave 
the  world  his  discovery  in  its  final  form.  Speaking 
of  his  inspiration  that  natural  selection  was  the  key 
to  the  mystery  of  the  origin  of  species,  he  says  : — 

"  Here,  then,  I  had  at  last  got  a  theory  by  which  to 
work ;  but  I  was  so  anxious  to  avoid  prejudice,  that 
I  determined  not  for  some  time  to  write  even  the 
briefest  sketch  of  it.  In  June,  1842  [z>,  four  years 
after  the  inspiration],  I  first  allowed  myself  the  satis- 
faction of  writing  a  very  brief  abstract  of  my  theory 
in  pencil  in  35  pages  ;  and  this  was  enlarged  during 
the  summer  of  1844  into  one  of  230  pages,  which  I 
had  fairly  copied  out  and  still  possess." 

Finally  an  abstract  from  Darwin's  manuscript  was 
published  with  Wallace's  Essay  in  1858,  and  the 
Origin  of  Species  appeared  in  1859. 

In  like    manner    Newton's    imagination   was   only 


INTRODUCTORY.  41 

paralleled  by  that  power  of  self-criticism  which  led 
him  to  lay  aside  a  demonstration  touching  the  gravi- 
tation of  the  moon  for  nearly  eighteen  years,  until  he 
had  supplied  a  missing  link  in  his  reasoning.  But 
our  details  of  Newton's  life  and  discoveries  are  too 
meagre  for  us  to  see  his  method  as  closely  as  we  can 
Darwin's,  and  the  account  I  have  given  of  the  latter 
is  amply  sufficient  to  show  the  actual  application  of 
scientific  method,  and  the  real  part  played  in  science 
by  the  disciplined  use  of  the  imagination.1 

1  That  the  classification  of  facts  is  often  largely  guided  by  the  imagi- 
nation as  well  as  the  reason  must  be  fully  admitted.  At  the  same  time 
an  accurate  classification,  either  due  to  the  scientist  himself  or  to  previous 
workers,  must  exist  in  the  scientist's  mind  before  he  can  proceed  to  the 
discovery  of  law.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  the  reader  will  find  that  I  differ 
very  widely  from  Stanley  Jevons'  views  as  developed  in  his  Principles  of 
Science.  I  cannot  but  feel  that  Chapter  xxvi.  of  that  work  would  have 
been  recast  had  the  author  been  acquainted  with  Darwin's  method  of 
procedure.  The  account  given  by  Jevons  of  the  Newtonian  method 
seems  to  me  to  lay  insufficient  stress  upon  the  fact  that  Newton  had 
a  wide  acquaintance  with  physics  before  he  proceeded  to  use  his 
imagination  and  test  his  theories  by  experiment — that  is,  to  a  period  of 
self-criticism.  The  reason  that  pseudo-scientists  cumber  the  reviewer's 
table  with  idle  theories,  often  showing  great  imaginative  power  and 
ingenuity,  is  not  solely  want  of  self-criticism.  Their  theories,  as  a 
rule,  are  not  such  as  the  scientist  himself  would  ever  propound  and 
criticise.  Their  impossibility  is  obvious,  because  their  propounders 
have  neither  formed  for  themselves,  nor  been  acquainted  with  others' 
classifications  of  the  groups  of  facts  which  their  theories  are  intended  to 
summarise.  Newton  and  Faraday  started  with  full  knowledge  of  the 
classifications  of  physical  facts  which  had  been  formed  in  their  own 
days,  and  proceeded  to  further  conjoint  theorizing  and  classifying. 
Bacon,  of  whom  Stanley  Jevons  is,  I  think,  unreasonably  contemptuous, 
lived  at  a  time  when  but  little  had  been  done  by  way  of  classification,  and 
he  was  wanting  in  the  scientific  imagination  of  a  Newton  or  a  Faraday. 
Hence  the  barrenness  of  his  method  in  his  own  hands.  The  early 
history  of  the  Royal  Society's  meetings  shows  how  essentially  the  period 
of  collection  and  classification  of  facts  preceded  that  of  valuable  theory. 

With  Stanley  Jevons'  last  chapter  on  The  Limits  of  Scientific  Method 
the  present  writer  can  only  express  his  complete  disagreement ;  many 


42  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

§  13. — Science  and  the  Esthetic  Judgment. 

We  are  justified,  I  think,  in  concluding  that  science 
does  not  cripple  the  imagination,  but  rather  tends  to 
exercise  and  discipline  its  functions.  We  have  still, 
however,  to  consider  another  phase  of  the  relationship 
of  the  imaginative  faculty  to  pure  science.  When  we 
see  a  great  work  of  the  creative  imagination,  a  striking 
picture  or  a  powerful  drama,  what  is  the  essence  of 
the  fascination  it  exercises  over  us  ?  Why  does  our 
aesthetic  judgment  pronounce  it  a  true  work  of  art  ? 
Is  it  not  because  we  find  concentrated  into  a  brief 
statement,  into  a  simple  formula  or  a  few  symbols,  a 
wide  range  of  human  emotions  and  feelings  ?  Is  it 
not  because  the  poet  or  the  artist  has  expressed  for 
us  in  his  representation  the  true  relationship  between 
a  variety  of  emotions,  which  we,  in  a  long  course  of 
experience,  have  been  consciously  or  unconsciously 
classifying  ?  Does  not  the  beauty  of  the  artist's  work 
lie  for  us  in  the  accuracy  with  which  his  symbols 
resume  innumerable  facts  of  our  past  emotional  ex- 
perience ?  The  aesthetic  judgment  pronounces  for  or 
against  the  interpretation  of  the  creative  imagination 
according  as  that  interpretation  embodies  or  contra- 
dicts the  phenomena  of  life,  which  we  ourselves  have 
observed.1  It  is  only  satisfied  when  the  artist's  formula 
contradicts  none  of  the  emotional  phenomena  which  it 
is  intended  to  resume.  If  this  account  of  the  aesthetic 
judgment  be  at  all  a  true  one,  the  reader  will  have  re- 

of  its  arguments  appear  to  him  unscientific,  if  it  were  not  better  to  term 
them  anti-scientific. 

1  How  important  a  part  length  and  variety  of  emotional  experience 
play  in  the  determination  of  the  aesthetic  judgment  is  easily  noted  by 
investigating  the  favourite  authors  and  pictures  of  a  few  friends  of 
diverse  ages  and  conditions. 


INTRODUCTORY  43 

marked  how  .exactly  parallel  it  is  to  the  scientific  judg- 
ment.1 But  there  is  really  more  than  mere  parallelism 
between  the  two.  The  laws  of  science  are,  as  we  have 
seen,  products  of  the  creative  imagination.  They  are 
the  mental  interpretations — the  formulae  under  which 
we  resume  wide  ranges  of  phenomena,  the  results  of 
observation  on  the  part  of  ourselves  or  of  our  fellow- 
men.  The  scientific  interpretation  of  phenomena,  the 
scientific  account  of  the  universe,  is  therefore  the  only 
one  which  can  permanently  satisfy  the  aesthetic  judg- 
ment, for  it  is  the  only  one  which  can  never  be  con- 
tradicted by  our  observation  and  experience.  It  is 
necessary  to  strongly  emphasise  this  side  of  science, 
for  we  are  frequently  told  that  the  growth  of  science 
is  destroying  the  beauty  and  poetry  of  life.  It  is 
undoubtedly  rendering  many  of  the  old  interpretations 
of  life  meaningless,  because  it  demonstrates  that  they 
are  false  to  the  facts  which  they  profess  to  describe. 
It  does  not  follow  from  this,  however,  that  the 
aesthetic  and  scientific  judgments  are  opposed ;  the 
fact  is,  that  with  the  growth  of  our  scientific  know- 
ledge the  basis  of  the  aesthetic  judgment  is  changing 
and  must  change.  There  is  more  real  beauty  in  what 
science  has  to  tell  us  of  the  chemistry  of  a  distant 
star,  or  in  the  life-history  of  a  protozoon,  than  in  any 
cosmogony  produced  by  the  creative  imagination  of 
a  pre-scientific  age.  By  "  more  real  beauty  "  we  are 
to  understand  that  the  aesthetic  judgment  will  find 
more  satisfaction,  more  permanent  delight  in  the 
former  than  in  the  latter.  It  is  this  continual  gratifi- 
cation of  the  aesthetic  judgment  which  is  one  of  the 
chief  delights  of  the  pursuit  of  pure  science. 

1  The  curious  reader  may  be  referred  to  Wordsworth's  "  General 
View  of  Poetry  "  in  his  preface  to  the  Lyrical  Ballads,  1815. 


44  THE   GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

§  14. —  The  Fourth  Claim  of  Science. 

There  is  an  insatiable  desire  in  the  human  breast 
to  resume  in  some  short  formula,  some  brief  state- 
ment, the  facts  of  human  experience.  It  leads  the 
savage  to  "  account "  for  all  natural  phenomena  by 
deifying  the  wind  and  the  stream  and  the  tree.  It 
leads  civilized  man,  on  the  other  hand,  to  express  his 
emotional  experience  in  works  of  art,  and  his  physical 
and  mental  experience  in  the  formulae  or  so-called 
laws  of  science.  Both  works  of  art  and  laws  of  science 
are  the  product  of  the  creative  imagination,  both  afford 
material  for  the  gratification  of  the  aesthetic  judg- 
ment. It  may  seem  at  first  sight  strange  to  the 
reader  that  the  laws  of  science  should  thus  be  asso- 
ciated with  the  creative  imagination  in  man  rather 
than  with  the  physical  world  outside  him.  But  as 
we  shall  see  in  the  course  of  the  following  chapters 
the  laws  of  science  are  products  of  the  human  mind 
rather  than  factors  of  the  external  world.  Science 
endeavours  to  provide  a  mental  r/sumt  of  the 
universe,  and  its  last  great  claim  to  our  support  is  the 
capacity  it  has  for  satisfying  our  cravings  for  a  brief 
description  of  the  history  of  the  world.  Such  a  brief 
description,  a  formula  resuming  all  things,  science 
has  not  yet  found  and  may  probably  never  find,  but 
of  this  we  may  feel  sure,  that  its  method  of  seeking 
for  one  is  the  sole  possible  method,  and  that  the 
truth  it  has  reached  is  the  only  form  of  truth  which 
can  permanently  satisfy  the  aesthetic  judgment. 
For  the  present,  then,  it  is  better  to  be  content  with 
the  fraction  of  a  right  solution,  than  to  beguile 
ourselves  with  the  whole  of  a  wrong  solution.  The 
former  is  at  least  a  step  towards  the  truth,  and  shows 
us  the  direction  in  which  other  steps  may  be  taken. 


INTRODUCTORY.  45 

The  latter  cannot  be  in  entire  accordance  with  our 
past  or  future  experience,  and  will  therefore  ulti- 
mately fail  to  satisfy  the  aesthetic  judgment.  Step 
by  step  that  judgment,  restless  under  the  growth  of 
positive  knowledge,  has  discarded  creed  after  creed, 
and  philosophic  system  after  philosophic  system. 
Surely  we  might  now  be  content  to  learn  from  the 
pages  of  history  that  only  little  by  little,  slowly  line 
upon  line,  man,  by  the  aid  of  organized  observation 
and  careful  reasoning,  can  hope  to  reach  knowledge 
of  the  truth,  that  science,  in  the  broadest  sense  of  the 
word,  is  the  sole  gateway  to  a  knowledge  which  can 
harmonize  with  our  past  as  well  as  with  our  possible 
future  experience.  As  Clifford  puts  it :  "  Scientific 
thought  is  not  an  accompaniment  or  condition  of 
human  progress,  but  human  progress  itself." 

SUMMARY. 

1.  The  scope  of  science  is  to  ascertain  truth  in  every  possible  branch 
of  knowledge.      There  is  no  sphere  of  inquiry  which  lies   outside 
the  legitimate  field   of  science.     To  draw  a  distinction  between  the 
scientific  and  philosophical  methods  is  obscurantism. 

2.  The  scientific  method  is  marked  by  the  following  features : — (a) 
Careful   and   accurate  classification  of  facts   and   observation  of  their 
correlation  and  sequence  ;  (b)  The  discovery  of  scientific  laws  by  aid  of 
the  creative  imagination  ;  (c)  Self-criticism  and  the  final  touchstone  of 
equal  validity  for  all  normally  constituted  minds. 

3.  The  claims  of  science  to  our  support  depend  on : — (a)  The  efficient 
mental  training  it  provides  for  the  citizen  ;  (b]  The  light  it  brings  to 
bear  on  many  important  social  problems  ;  (c)  The  increased  comfort  it 
adds  to  practical  life  ;  (d)  The  permanent  gratification  it  yields  to  the 
aesthetic  judgment. 


LITERATURE. 

BACON,  Francis.— Novum  Organum,  London,  1620.     A  good  edition 
by  T.  Fowler.     Clarendon  Press,  1878. 


46  THE   GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

BOIS-REYMOND,    E.   du. — Ueber   die    Grenzen  des   Naturerkennens. 

Veit  &  Co.,  Leipzig,  1876. 
BOIS-REYMOND,  P.  du. — Ueber  die  Grundlagen  der  Erkenntniss  in  den 

exacten  Wissenschaften.     H.  Laupp,  Tubingen,  1890. 
CLIFFORD,  W.  K. — Lectures  and  Essays.     Macmillan,  1879.    ("Aims 

and  Instruments  of  Scientific  Thought,"  "  The  Ethics  of  Belief," 

and  "  Virchow  on  the  Teaching  of  Science.") 
HAECKEL,  E.— Freie  Wissenschaft  and  freie  Lehre.    E.  Schweizerbart, 

Stuttgart,  1878. 
HALDANE,  J.  S. — "  Life  and  Mechanism,"  Mind,  ix.  pp.  27-47  >  also 

Nature,  vol.  xxvii.,   1883,  p.    561,  vol.   xxiv,,   1886,  p.  73;  and 

also  Haldane,  R.  B.,  Proceedings  of  the  Aristotolean  Society,  1891, 

vol.  i.  no.  4,  part  i.  pp.  22-27. 
HELMHOLTZ,   H.— On  the  Relation  of  the  Natural   Sciences  to  the 

Totality  of  the  Sciences,  translated  by  C.  H.  Schaible.     London, 

1869. 
This  occurs  also  in  the  Popular  Lectures,  translated  by  Atkinson  and 

others,  First  Series,  p.  i.     Longmans,  1881. 
HERSCIIEL,    Sir    John. — A    Preliminary    Dissertation    on    Natural 

Philosophy.     London,  1830. 
JEVONS,  W.  Stanley. — The  Principles  of  Science  :  A  Treatise  on  Logic 

and  Scientific  Method,  2nd  ed.     Macmillan,  1877. 
PEARSON,  K. — The  Ethic  of  Freethought :  A  Selection  of  Essays  and 

Lectures  ("  The   Enthusiasm   of  the   Market-place  and   of   the 

Study").     Fisher  Unwin,  1888. 
VIRCHOW,    R. — Die   Freiheit    der  Wissenschaft  im  modernen  Staat 

(Versammlung  deutscher  Naturforscher).    Miinchen,  1877. 


CHAPTER   II. 
THE  FACTS  OF  SCIENCE. 

§i.— The  Reality  oj  Things. 

IN  our  first  chapter  we  have  frequently  spoken  of  the 
classification  of  facts  as  the  basis  of  the  scientific 
method  ;  we  have  also  had  occasion  to  use  the  words 
real  and  unreal,  universe  and  phenomenon.  It  is 
proper,  therefore,  that  before  proceeding  further  we 
should  endeavour  to  clear  up  our  ideas  as  to  what 
these  terms  signify.  We  must  strive  to  define  a  little 
more  closely  in  what  the  material  of  science  consists. 
We  have  seen  that  the  legitimate  field  of  science 
embraces  all  the  mental  and  physical  facts  of  the 
universe.  But  what  are  these  facts  in  themselves 
and  what  is  for  us  the  criterion  of  their  reality  ? 

Let  us  start  our  investigation  with  some  "  external 
object,"  and  as  apparent  simplicity  will  be  satisfied  by 
takingafamiliarrequisiteoftheauthor'scalling,namely, 
a  blackboard,  let  us  take  it.1  We  find  an  outer  rectan- 
gular frame  of  brownish-yellow  colour,  which  on  closer 
inspection  we  presume  to  be  wood,  surrounding  an 
inner  fairly  smooth  surface  painted  black.  We  can 
measure  a  certain  height,  thickness,  and  breadth,  we 
notice  a  certain  degree  of  hardness,  weight,  resistance 

1  The  blackboard  as  an  "  object-lesson  "  is  such  a  favourite  instance 
with  the  writer,  that  the  reader  will  perhaps  pardon  him  the  use  of  it 
here.  Seine  Mundart  klebt  jedem  an. 


48  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

to  breaking,  and,  if  we  examine  further,  a  certain 
temperature,  for  the  board  feels  to  us  cold  or  warm. 
Now  although  the  blackboard  at  first  sight  appears  a 
very  simple  object,  we  see  that  it  at  once  leads  us  up 
to  a  very  complex  group  of  properties.  In  common 
talk  we  attribute  all  these  properties  to  the  blackboard, 
but  when  we  begin  to  think  over  the  matter  carefully 
we  shall  find  that  it  is  by  no  means  so  simple  as  it 
seems  to  be.  To  begin  with,  I  receive  certain  im- 
pressions of  size  and  shape  and  colour  by  means  of 
my  organs  of  sight,  and  these  enable  me  to  pronounce 
with  very  considerable  certainty  that  the  object  is  a 
blackboard  made  of  wood  and  coated  with  paint,  even 
before  I  have  touched  or  measured  it.  I  infer  that  I 
shall  find  it  hard  and  heavy,  that  I  could  if  I  pleased 
saw  it  up,  and  that  I  should  find  it  to  possess  various 
other  properties  which  I  have  learnt  to  associate  with 
wood  and  paint.  These  inferences  and  associations  are 
something  which  I  add  to  the  sight-impressions,  and 
which  I  myself  contribute  from  my  past  experience 
and  put  into  the  object — blackboard.  I  might  have 
reached  my  conception  of  the  blackboard  by  impres- 
sions of  touch  and  not  by  those  of  sight.  Blind- 
folded I  might  have  judged  of  its  size  and  shape,  of 
its  hardness  and  surface  texture,  and  then  have 
inferred  its  probable  use  and  appearance,  and 
associated  with  it  all  blackboard  characteristics.  In 
both  cases  it  must  be  noted  that  a  sine  qua  non  of  the 
existence  of  an  actual  blackboard  is  some  immediate 
sense-impression  to  start  with.  The  sense-impressions 
which  determine  the  reality  of  the  external  object 
may  be  very  few  indeed,  the  object  may  be  largely 
constructed  by  inferences  and  associations,  but  some 
sense-impressions  there  must  be  if  I  am  to  term  the 


THE  FACTS  OF  SCIENCE.  49 

object  real,  and  not  a  product  merely  of  my  imagina- 
tion. The  existence  of  a  certain  number  of  sense- 
impressions  leads  me  to  infer  the  possibility  of  my 
receiving  others,  and  this  possibility  I  can,  if  I  please, 
put  to  the  test. 

I  have  heard  of  the  Capitol  at  Washington,  and 
although  I  have  never  been  to  America,  I  am 
convinced  of  the  reality  of  America  and  the  Capitol — 
that  is,  I  believe  certain  sense-impressions  would  be 
experienced  by  me  if  I  put  myself  in  the  proper 
circumstances.  In  this  case  I  have  had  indirect  sense- 
impressions,  contact  with  Americans,  and  with  ships 
and  chattels  coming  from  America,  which  lead  me  to 
believe  in  the  "  reality  "  of  America  and  of  what  my 
eyes  or  ears  have  told  me  of  its  contents.  In 
constructing  the  Capitol  it  is  clear  that  past  expe- 
rience of  a  variety  of  kinds  is  largely  drawn  upon. 
But  it  must  be  noted  that  this  past  experience  is 
itself  based  upon  sense-impressions  of  one  kind  or 
another.  These  sense-impressions  have  been  as  it 
were  stored  in  the  memory.  A  sense-impression,  if 
sufficiently  strong,  leaves  in  our  brain  some  more  or 
less  permanent  trace  of  itself,  which  is  rendered 
manifest  in  the  form  of  association  whenever  an 
immediate  sense-impression  of  a  like  kind  recurs. 
The  stored  effects  of  past  sense-impressions  form  to 
a  great  extent  what  we  are  accustomed  to  speak  of  as 
an  "  external  object."  On  this  account  such  an  object 
must  be  recognized  as  largely  constructed  by  ourselves ; 
we  add  to  a  greater  or  less  number  of  immediate  sense- 
impressions  an  associated  group  of  stored  sense- 
impresses.  The  proportion  of  the  two  contributions 
will  depend  largely  on  the  keenness  of  our  organs  of 
sense  and  on  the  length  and  variety  of  our  experience* 

5 


v 

; 


5O  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

Owing  to  the  large  amount  we  ourselves  contribute  to 
most  external  objects,  Professor  Lloyd  Morgan,  in  the 
able  discussion  of  this  matter  in  his  Animal  Life  and 
Intelligence  (p.  3 1 2)  proposes  to  use  the  term  construct 
for  the  external  object.  What  for  our  present  purpose, 
then,  it  is  very  needful  to  bear  in  mind  is  this  :  an 
external  object  is  in  general  a  construct — that  is,  a 
combination  of  immediate  with  past  or  stored  sense- 
impressions.  The  reality  of  a  thing  depends  upon  the 
possibility  of  its  occurring  as  a  group  of  immediate 
sense-impressions.1 


§  2. — Sense-Impressiotts  and  Consciousness. 

This  conception  of  reality  as  based  upon  sense- 
'  impressions  requires  careful  consideration  and  some 
reservations  and  modifications.  Let  us  examine  a 
little  more  closely  what  we  are  to  understand  by  the 
word  sense-impression.  In  turning  round  quickly 
in  my  chair,  I  knock  my  knee  against  a  sharp  edge 
of  the  table.  Without  any  thought  of  what  I  am 
doing  my  hand  moves  down  and  rubs  the  bruised 
part,  or  the  knee  may  cause  me  so  much  discomfort 
that  I  get  up,  think  of  what  I  shall  do,  and  settle  to 
apply  some  arnica.  Now  the  two  actions  on  my  part 
appear  of  totally  different  character — at  least  on  first 

1  The  division  between  the  real  and  unreal,  and  again  between 
the  real  and  ideal,  is  less  distinct  than  many  may  think.  For 

\  example,  the  planet  Neptune  passed  from  the  ideal  to  the  real,  but  the 
atom  is  still  ideal.  The  ideal  passes  into  the  real  when  its  perceptual 
equivalent  is  found,  but  the  unreal  can  never  become  real.  Thus  the 

»  concepts  of  the  metaphysicians,  Kant's  thing  in  itself  or  Clifford's 
mind  stuff  wto.  in  my  sense  of  the  words  unreal  (not  ideal),  they  cannot 
become  immediate  sense-impressions,  but  the  physical  hypotheses  as  to 

*  the  nature  of  matter  are  ideal  (not  unreal)  for  they  do  not  lie  absolutely 
outside  the  field  of  possible  sense-impressions. 


THE  FACTS   OF   SCIENCE.  $1 

examination.  In  both  cases  physiologists  tells .  us 
that  as  a  primary  stage  a  message  is  carried  from  the 
affected  part  by  what  is  termed  a  sensory  nerve  to  the 
brain.  The  manner  in  which  this  nerve  conveys  its 
message  is  without  doubt  physical,  although  its  exact 
modus  operandt  is  still  unknown.  At  the  brain  what 
we  term  the  sense-impression  is  formed,  and  there 
most  probably  some  physical  change  takes  place 
which  remains  with  a  greater  or  less  degree  of  per- 
sistence in  the  case  of  those  stored  sense-impresses 
which  we  term  memories.  Everything  up  to  the 
receipt  of  the  sense-impression  by  the  brain  is  what 
we  are  accustomed  to  term  physical  or  mechanical,  it 
is  a  legitimate  inference  to  suppose  that  what  from 
the  psychical  aspect  we  term  memory,  has  also  a 
physical  side,  that  the  brain  takes  for  every  memory 
a  permanent  physical  impress,  whether  by  change  in 
the  molecular  constitution  or  in  the  elementary 
motions  of  the  brain-substance,  and  that  such  phy- 
sical impress  is  our  stored  sense-impress.1  These 
physical  impresses  play  an  important  part  in  the 
manner  in  which  future  sense-impressions  of  a  like 
character  are  received.  If  these  immediate  sense- 
impressions  be  of  sufficient  strength,  or  amplitude  as 
we  might  perhaps  venture  to  say,  they  will  call  into 
some  sort  of  activity  a  number  of  physical  impresses 
due  to  past  sense-impressions  allied,  or,  to  use 
a  more  suggestive  word,  attuned  to  the  immediate 
sense-impression.  The  immediate  sense-impression 
is  conditioned  by  the  physical  impresses  of  the  past, 

1  The  closest  physical  analogies  to  the  "permanent  impresses" 
termed  memory  are  the  set  and  after-strain  of  the  elastician.  To  assert 
that  they  are  more  than  analogies  would  be  to  usurp  the  function  of  the 
physiologist. 


52  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

and  the  general  result  is  what  has  been    termed  a 
"  construct." 

Besides  the  sensory  nerves  which  convey  the  mes- 
sages to  the  brain,  there  are  other  nerves  which  pro- 
ceed from  the  brain  and  control  the  muscles  termed 
motor  nerves.  Through  these  motor  nerves  a  message 
is  sent  to  my  arm  bidding  it  rub  my  bruised  knee. 
This  message  may  be  sent  immediately  or  after  my 
fingers  have  been  dipped  in  arnica.  In  the  latter  case 
a  very  complex  process  has  been  gone  through.  I  have 
realized  that  the  sense-impression  corresponds  to  a 
bruised  knee,  that  arnica  is  good  for  a  bruise,  that  a 
bottle  of  arnica  is  to  be  found  in  a  certain  cupboard, 
and  so  forth.  Clearly  the  sense-impression  has  been 
conditioned  by  a  number  of  past  impresses  before 
the  motor  nerve  of  the  arm  is  called  into  play  to  rub 
the  knee.  The  process  is  described  as  thinking,  and 
as  a  variety  of  past  experiences  may  come  into  play, 
the  ultimate  message  to  the  motor  nerves  appears  to 
us  voluntary,  and  we  call  it  an  act  of  will,  however 
f  much  it  is  really  conditioned  by  the  stored  sense-im- 
i  presses  of  the  past.  On  the  other  hand,  when,  with- 
out apparently  exciting  any  past  sense-impresses, 
the  message  from  the  sensory  nerve  no  sooner  reaches 
the  brain  than  a  command  is  sent  along  the  motor 
nerve  for  the  hand  to  rub  the  knee,  I  am  said  to  act 
involuntarily,  from  instinct  or  habit.  The  whole  pro- 
cess may  be  so  rapid,  I  may  be  so  absorbed  in  my  work, 
that  I  never  realized  the  message  from  the  sensory 
nerve  at  all.  I  do  not  even  say  to  myself,  "  I  have 
knocked  my  knee  and  rubbed  it."  Only  a  spectator, 
perhaps,  has  been  conscious  of  the  whole  process  of 
knee-knocking  and  rubbing.  Now  this  is  in  many 
respects  an  important  result.  I  can  receive  a  sense- 


THE   FACTS   OF   SCIENCE.  53 

impression  without  recognizing  it,  or  a  sense-impres- 
sion does  not  involve  consciousness.  In  this  case 
there  is  no  group  of  stored  sense-impresses,  no  chain 
of  what  we  term  thoughts  intervening  between  the 
immediate  sense-impression  and  the  message  to  the 
motor  nerve.  Thus  what  we  term  consciousness  is 
largely,  if  not  wholly,  due  to  the  stock  of  stored  sense- 
impresses,  and  to  the  manner  in  which  these  condition 
the  messages  given  to  the  motor  nerves  when  a  sen- 
sory nerve  has  conveyed  a  message  to  the  brain.  The 
measure  of  consciousness  will  thus  largely  depend  on 
(i)  the  extent  and  variety  of  past  sense-impressions, 
and  (2)  the  degree  to  which  the  brain  can  perma- 
nently preserve  the  impress  of  these  sense-impressions, 
or  what  might  be  termed  the  complexity  and  plasticity 
of  the  brain. 

§  3. —  The  Brain  as  a  Central  Telephone  Exchange. 

The  view  of  brain  activity  here  discussed  may  per- 
haps be  elucidated  by  comparing  the  brain  to  the 
central  office  of  a  telephone  exchange,  from  which 
wires  radiate  to  the  subscribers  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  F,  &c., 
who  are  senders,  and  to  W,  X,  Y,  Z,  &c.,  who  are 
receivers  of  messages.  A,  having  notified  to  the 
company  that  he  never  intends  to  correspond  with 
anybody  but  W,  his  wire  is  joined  to  W's,  and  the 
clerk  remains  unconscious  of  the  arrival  of  the  mes- 
sage from  A  and  its  dispatch  to  W,  although  it  passes 
through  his  office.1  There  is  indeed  no  call-bell.  This 

1  If  these  wires  were  connected  outside  the  office,  we  should  have  an 
analogy  to  certain  possibilities  of  reflex  action,  which  arise  from  sensory 
and  motor  nerves  being  linked  before  reaching  the  brain — e.g.,  a  frog's 
leg  will  be  moved  so  as  to  rub  an  irritated  point  on  its  back  even  after 
the  removal  of  the  brain. 


54  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

corresponds  to  an  instinctive  exertion  following  uncon- 
sciously on  a  sense-impression.  Next  the  clerk  finds 
by  experience  that  B  invariably  desires  to  correspond 
with  X,  and  consequently  whenever  he  hears  B's  call- 
bell  he  links  him  mechanically  to  X,  without  stopping 
for  a  moment  his  perusal  of  Tit-Bits.  This  corre- 
sponds to  a  habitual  exertion  following  unconsciously 
on  a  sense-impression.  Lastly,  C,  D,  E,  and  F  may 
set  their  bells  ringing  for  a  variety  of  purposes  ;  the 
clerk  has  in  each  case  to  answer  their  demands,  but 
this  may  require  him  to  listen  to  the  special  com- 
munications of  these  subscribers,  to  examine  his  lists, 
his  post-office  directory,  or  any  other  source  of  infor- 
mation stored  in  his  office.  Finally,  he  shunts  their 
wires  so  as  to  bring  them  in  circuit  with  those  of  Y  and 
Z,  which  seem  to  best  suit  the  nature  of  the  demands. 
This  corresponds  to  an  exertion  following  consciously 
on  the  receipt  of  a  sense-impression.  In  all  cases 
the  activity  of  the  exchange  arises  from  the  receipt  of 
a  message  from  one  of  a  possibly  great,  but  still  finite 
number  of  senders,  A,  B,  C,  D,  &c.  ;  the  originality  of 
the  clerk  is  confined  to  immediately  following  their 
behests  or  to  satisfying  their  demands  to  the  best  of 
his  ability  by  the  information  stored  in  his  office. 
The  analogy  of  course  must  not  be  pressed  too  far — 
in  particular  senders  and  receivers  must  be  considered 
distinct,  for  sensory  and  motor  nerves  do  not  appear 
to  interchange  functions.  But  the  conception  of  the 
brain  as  a  central  exchange  certainly  casts  considerable 
light  not  only  on  the  action  of  sensory  and  motor 
nerves,  but  also  on  thought  and  consciousness.  With- 
out sense-impressions  there  would  be  nothing  to  store  ; 
without  the  faculty  of  receiving  permanent  impress, 
without  memory,  there  would  be  no  possibility  of 


THE   FACTS   OF   SCIENCE.  55 

thought  ;  and  without  this  thought,  this  hesitation 
between  sense-impression  and  exertion,  there  would 
be  no  consciousness.  When  an  exertion  follows 
immediately  on  a  sense-impression  we  speak  of  the 
exertion  as  involuntary,  our  action  as  subject  to  the 
mechanical  control  of  the  "external  object  "  to  which 
we  attribute  the  sense-impression.  On  the  other  hand, 
when  the  exertion  is  conditioned  by  stored  sense- 
impresses  we  term  our  action  voluntary.  We  speak 
of  it  as  determined  from  "  within  ourselves,"  and 
assert  the  "  freedom  of  our  will."  In  the  former  case 
the  exertion  is  conditioned  solely  by  the  immediate 
sense-impression  ;  in  the  latter  it  is  conditioned  by  a 
complex  of  impressions  partly  immediate  and  partly 
stored.  The  past  training,  the  past  history  and  experi- 
ence which  mould  character  and  determine  the  will, 
are  really  based  on  sense-impressions  received  at  one 
time  or  another,  and  hence  we  may  say  that  exertion, 
whether  immediate  or  deferred,  is  the  product  directly 
or  indirectly  of  sense-impressions. 

§  4. —  The  Nature  of  Thought. 

There  are  still  one  or  two  points  to  be  noted  here. 
In  the  first  place  the  immediate  sense-impression  is 
to  be  looked  upon  as  the  spark  which  kindles  thought, 
which  brings  into  play  the  stored  impresses  of  past 
sense-impressions.  But  the  complexity  of  the  human 
brain  is  such,  its  stored  sense-impresses  are  linked 
together  in  so  many  and  diverse  ways — partly  by 
continual  thinking,  partly  by  immediate  sense-impres- 
sions occurring  in  proximity  and  so  linking  together 
apparently  discordant  groups  of  past  impresses — that 
we  are  not  always  able  to  recognize  the  relation  be- 


56  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

tween  an  immediate  sense-impression  and  the  result- 
ing train  of  thought.  Nor,  on  the  other  hand,  can  we 
always  trace  back  a  train  of  thought  to  the  immediate 
sense-impression  from  which  it  started.  Yet  we  may 
take  it  for  certain  that  elements  of  thought  are  ulti- 
mately the  permanent  impress  of  past  sense-impres- 
sions, and  that  thought  itself  is  started  by  immediate 
sense-impressions.1 

This  statement  must  not  be  in  any  way  supposed 
to  narrow  the  material  of  thought  to  those  combina- 
tions of  "  external  objects  "  which  we  associate  with 
immediate  sense-impressions.  Thought  once  excited, 
the  mind  passes  with  wonderful  activity  from  one 
stored  impress  to  another,  it  classifies  these  im- 
presses, analyzes  or  simplifies  their  characteristics, 
and  forms  general  notions  of  properties  and  modes. 
It  proceeds  from  the  direct — what  might  perhaps  be 
termed  the  physical — association  of  memory,  to  the 
indirect  or  mental  association  ;  it  passes  from  perceiv- 
ing to  conceiving.  The  mental  association,  or  recogni- 
tion of  relation  between  the  stored  impresses  of  past 
sense-impressions  has  probably,  if  we  could  follow  it, 
as  definite  a  physical  side  as  the  physical  association 
of  immediate  sense-impressions  and  past  impresses- 
But  the  physical  side  of  the  impress  is  only  a 
reasonable  inference  from  the  physical  nature  of  the 
immediate  sense-impression,  and  we  must  therefore 
content  ourselves  at  present  by  considering  it  highly 
probable  that  every  process  of  thought  has  a  physical 

1  The  exact  train  of  thought  which  follows  an  immediate  sense-im- 
pression depends  largely  on  the  physical  condition  of  the  brain  at  the 
time  of  its  receipt,  and  is  further  largely  conditioned  by  the  mode  in 
which  stored  sense-impresses  have  been  excited  in  the  past,  z.<?.,  thf 
memory  exercised. 


THE   FACTS   OF   SCIENCE.  57 

aspect,  even  if  we  are  very  far  as  yet  from  being  able 
to  trace  it  out. 

This  process  of  mental  association  we  can  only 
recognize  as  certainly  occurring  in  our  individual 
selves.  The  reason  why  we  infer  it  in  others  we  shall 
consider  later.  The  amount  of  it,  however,  in  our 
individual  selves  must  largely  depend  on  the  variety 
and  extent  of  our  stored  impresses,  and  further  on 
the  individual  capacity  for  thinking,  or  on  the  form 
and  development  of  the  physical  organ  wherein  the 
process  of  thinking  takes  place,  on  the  brain.  The 
brain  in  the  individual  man  is  probably  considerably 
influenced  by  heredity,  by  health,  by  exercise,  and 
by  other  factors,  but  speaking  generally  the  physical 
instruments  of  thought  in  two  normal  human  beings 
are  machines  of  the  same  type,  varying  indeed  in 
efficiency,  but  not  in  kind  or  function.  For  the  same 
two  normal  human  beings  the  organs  of  sense  are  also 
machines  of  the  same  type  and  thus  within  limits 
only  capable  of  conveying  the  same  sense-impres- 
sions to  the  brain.  Herein  consists  the  similarity  of 
the  universe  for  all  normal  human  beings.  The  same 
type  of  physical  organ  receives  the  same  sense-impres- 
sions and  forms  the  same  "  constructs."  Two  normal 
perceptive  faculties  construct  practically  the  same 
universe.  Were  this  not  true  the  results  of  thinking 
in  one  mind  would  have  no  validity  for  a  second 
mind.  The  universal  validity  of  science  depends 
upon  the  similarity  of  the  perceptive  and  reasoning 
faculties  in  normal  civilized  men. 

The  above  discussion  of  the  nature  of  thought  is 
not  of  course  to  be  looked  upon  as  final,  or  as  offering 
any  real  explanation  of  the  psychical  side  of  thought. 
It  is  merely  intended  to  suggest  the  manner  in  which 


58  THE   GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

we  may  consider  thought  to  be  conditioned  by  its 
physical  aspects.  What  the  actual  relations  between 
the  psychical  and  physical  sides  of  thought  are,  we 
do  not  know,  and,  as  in  all  such  cases,  it  is  best  to 
directly  confess  our  ignorance.  It  is  no  use,  indeed 
only  dangerous,  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge 
with  regard  to  psychology  and  the  physics  of  the 
brain,  to  fill  the  void  of  ignorance  by  hypotheses  which 
can  neither  be  proven  nor  refuted.  Thus  if  we  say 
that  thought  and  motion  are  the  same  thing  seen  from 
different  sides,  we  make  no  real  progress  in  our 
analysis  for  we  can  form  no  conception  whatever  as 
to  what  the  nature  in  itself  of  this  thing  may  be. 
Indeed,  if  we  go  further  and  compare  thought  and 
motion  to  the  concave  and  convex  sides  of  the  same 
surface,  we  may  do  positive  harm  rather  than  good  ; 
for  convexity  and  concavity  are  not  when  accurately 
defined  by  the  mathematician  different  qualities,  but 
only  degrees  of  the  same  quantity,  curvature,  passing 
the  one  into  the  other  through  zero-curvature  or  flat-- 
ness. On  the  other  hand  the  distinction  between  the 
psychical  and  physical  aspects  of  brain  activity  seems 
to  be  essentially  one  of  quality,  not  of  degree.  It  is 
better  to  content  ourselves  in  the  present  state  of  our 
knowledge  by  remarking  that  in  all  probability  sense- 
impressions  lead  to  certain  physical  (including  under 
this  term  possible  chemical)  activities  of  the  brain, 
and  that  these  activities  are  recognized  by  each 
individual  for  himself  only  under  the  form  of  thought. 
Each  individual  recognizes  his  own  consciousness, 
perceives  that  the  interval  between  sensation  and 
exertion  is  occupied  by  a  certain  psychical  process. 
We  recognize  consciousness  in  our  individual  selves, 
we  assume  it  to  exist  in  others. 


THE  FACTS  OF   SCIENCE.  59 

§  5.  —  Other — Consciousness  as  an  Eject. 

The  assumption  just  referred  to  is  by  no  means  of 
the  same  nature  as  that  which  we  make  every  moment 
in  the  formation  of  what  we  have  termed  constructs 
from  a  limited  group  of  immediate  sense-impressions. 
I  see  the  shape,  size,  and  colour  of  the  blackboard, 
and  I  assume  that  I  shall  find  it  hard  and  heavy.  But 
here  the  assumed  properties  are  capable  of  being  put 
to  the  direct  test  of  immediate  sense-impression.  I 
can  touch  and  lift  the  blackboard  and  complete  my 
analysis  of  its  properties.  Even  the  Capitol  in 
Washington,  of  which  I  have  had  no  direct  sense- 
impression,  is  capable  of  being  put  to  the  same  sort  of 
direct  test.  Another  man's  consciousness,  however, 
can  never,  it  is  said,  be  directly  perceived  by  sense- 
impression,  I  can  only  infer  its  existence  from  the 
apparent  similarity  of  our  nervous  systems,  from 
observing  the  same  hesitation  in  his  case  as  in  my  own 
between  sense-impression  and  exertion,  and  from  the 
similarity  between  his  activities  and  my  own.  The 
inference  is  really  not  so  great  as  the  metaphysicians 
would  wish  us  to  believe.  It  is  an  inference  ultimately 
based  on  the  physical  fact  of  the  interval  between 
sense-impression  and  exertion  ;  and  though  we  cannot 
as  yet  physically  demonstrate  another  person's  con- 
sciousness, neither  can  we  demonstrate  physically  that 
earth-grown  apples  would  fall  at  the  surface  of  the 
planet  of  a  fixed  star  or  that  atoms  really  are  a  stage 
in  the  resolution  of  matter.  It  may  be  suggested 
that  if  our  organs  of  sense  were  finer,  or  our  means 
of  locomotion  more  complete,  we  might  be  able  to 
see  atoms  or  to  carry  earth-grown  apples  to  a  fixed 
star — in  other  words,  to  test  physically,  or  by  imme- 
diate sense-impression  these  inferences.  But ; — 


OO  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

"  When  I  come  to  the  conclusion  that  you 
are  conscious,  and  that  there  are  objects  in  your 
consciousness  similar  to  those  in  mine,  I  am  not 
inferring  any  actual  or  possible  feelings  of  my  own, 
but  your  feelings,  which  are  not,  and  cannot  by  any 
possibility  become,  objects  in  my  consciousness."  l 

To  this  it  may  be  replied,  that,  were  our  physiologi- 
cal knowledge  and  surgical  manipulation  sufficiently 
complete,  it  is  conceivable  that  it  would  be  possible 
for  me  to  be  conscious  of  your  feelings,  to  recognize 
your  consciousness  as  a  direct  sense-impression  ;  let 
us  say,  for  example,  by  connecting  the  cortex  of  your 
brain  with  that  of  mine  through  a  suitable  commissure 
of  nerve-substance.  The  possibility  of  this  physical 
verification  of  other-consciousness  does  not  seem  more 
remote  than  that  of  a  journey  to  a  fixed  star.  Indeed, 
there  are  some  who  think  that  without  this  hypothetical 
nerve  connection  the  processes  popularly  termed, 
"  anticipating  another  person's  wishes,"  "reading  his 
thoughts,"  &c.,  have  in  them  the  elements  of  a  sense- 
impression  of  other-consciousness,  and  are  not  en- 
tirely indirect  inferences  from  practical  experience. 

Clifford  has  given  the  name  eject  to  existences 
which,  like  other-consciousness,  are"only  inferred,  and 
the  name  is  a  convenient  one.  At  the  same  time  it 
seems  to  me  doubtful  whether  the  distinction  between 
object  (what  might  possibly  come  to  my  consciousness 
as  a  direct  sense-impression)  and  eject  is  so  marked  as 
he  would  have  us  to  believe.  The  complicated 
physical  motions  of  another  person's  brain,  it  is 
admitted,  might  possibly  be  objective  realities  to  me  ; 
but  on  the  other  hand  might  not  the  hypothetical  brain 

1  W.  K.  Clifford,  "  On  the  Nature  of  Things-in-Themselves,"Z^^m 
and  Essay  Si  vol.  ii.  p.  72. 


THE   FACTS   OF   SCIENCE.  6l 

commissure  render  me  just  as  certain  of  the  work- 
ings of  another  person's  consciousness  as  I  am  of  my 
own  ?  In  this  respect,  therefore,  it  does  not  seem 
necessary  to  assert  that  consciousness  lies  outside  the 
field  of  science,  or  must  perforce  escape  the  methods 
of  physical  experiment  and  research.  We  maybe  far 
enough  removed  from  knowledge  at  the  present  time, 
but  I  see  no  logical  hindrance  to  our  asserting  that  in 
the  dim  future  we  might  possibly  obtain  objective 
acquaintance  with  what  at  present  appears  merely  as 
an  eject.  We  can  do  this  indeed  without  any 
dogmatic  assumption  that  psychical  effects  can  all  be 
reduced  to  physical  motion.  Psychical  effects  are 
without  doubt  excited  by  physical  action,  and  our 
only  assumption  is  the  not  unreasonable  one,  that  a 
suitable  physical  link  might  transfer  an  appreciation 
of  psychical  activity  from  one  psychical  centre  to 
another. 

§  6. — Attittide  of  Science  towards  Ejects. 

Indeed  in  some  respects  other-consciousness  appears 
less  beyond  our  reach  than  many  inferred  existences. 
Some  physicists  infer  the  existence  of  atoms,  although 
they  have  had  no  experience  of  any  individual  atom, 
because  the  hypothesis  of  their  existence  enables  them 
to  briefly  resume  a  number  of  sense-impressions.  We 
infer  the  existence  of  other-consciousness  for  a  precisely 
similar  reason ;  but  in  this  case  we  have  the  advantage 
of  knowing  at  least  one  individual  consciousness, 
namely,  our  own.  We  see  in  ourselves  how  it  links 
sense-impression  and  deferred  exertion.  While  the 
atom,  like  other-consciousness,  might  possibly  some 
day,  attain  to  objective  reality,  there  are  certain  con- 
ceptions dealt  with  by  science,  for  which,  as  we  shall 


62  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

see  in  the  sequel,  this  is  impossible.  For  example, 
our  geometrical  ideas  of  curves  and  surfaces  are  of 
this  character.  None  the  less,  although  they  might 
with  greater  logic  be  termed  ejects  than,  perhaps,  other- 
consciousness,  there  are  few  who  would  deny  that 
they  have  their  ultimate  origin  in  sense-impressions, 
from  which  they  have  been  extracted  or  isolated  by 
the  process  of  mental  generalization,  to  which  we  have 
previously  referred  (p.  56).  A  still  more  marked 
case  of  conceptions,  which  we  are  incapable  of  verify- 
ing directly  by  any  form  of  immediate  sense-impres- 
sion, is  that  of  historical  facts.  We  believe  that  King 
John  really  signed  Magna  Charta,  and  that  there  was 
a  period  when  snow-fields  and  glaciers  covered  the 
greater  part  of  England,  yet  these  conceptions  can 
never  have  come  to  our  consciousness  as  direct  sense- 
impressions,  nor  can  they  be  verified  in  like  manner. 
They  are  conclusions  we  have  reached  by  a  long 
chain  of  inferences,  starting  in  direct  sense-impres- 
sions and  ending  in  that  which,  unlike  atom  and 
other-consciousness,  can  by  no  possibility  be  verified 
directly  by  immediate  sense-impression.  When, 
therefore,  we  state  that  all  the  contents  of  our  mind 
are  ultimately  based  on  sense-impressions,  we  must 
be  careful  to  recognize  that  the  mind  has  by  classifi- 
cation and  isolation  proceeded  to  conceptions  which 
are  widely  removed  from  sense-impressions  capable  of 
immediate  verification.  The  contents  of  the  mind  at 
any  instant  are  very  far  from  being  identical  with 
the  range  of  actual  or  possible  sense-impressions  at 
that  instant.  We  are  perpetually  drawing  inferences 
from  our  immediate  and  stored  sense-impresses 
as  to  things  which  lie  beyond  immediate  verification 
by  sense  ; — that  is,  we  infer  the  existence  of  things 


THE  FACTS  OF  SCIENCE.  63 

which  do  not  belong  to  the  objective  world,  or  which 
at  any  rate  cannot  be  directly  verified  by  immediate 
sense-impression  as  belonging  to  it  at  the  present 
moment.  Strange  as  it  may  seem,  science  is  largely 
based  upon  inferences  of  this  kind  ;  its  hypotheses  lie 
to  a  great  extent  beyond  the  region  of  the  immediately 
sensible,  and  it  chiefly  deals  with  conceptions  drawn 
from  sense-impressions,  and  not  with  sense-impressions 
themselves. 

This  point  needs  to  be  specially  emphasized,  for 
we  are  often  told  that  the  scientific  method  applies 
only  to  the  external  world  of  phenomena,  and  that  the 
legitimate  field  of  science  lies  solely  among  immediate 
sense-impressions.  The  object  of  the  present  work  is 
to  insist  on  a  directly  contrary  proposition,  namely, 
that  science  is  in  reality  a  classification  and  analysis 
of  the  contents  of  the  mind  ;  and  the  scientific  method 
consists  in  drawing  just  comparisons  and  inferences 
from  stored  sense-impresses  and  the  conceptions 
based  upon  them.  Not  till  the  immediate  sense- 
impression  has  reached  the  level  of  a  conception,  or] 
at  least  a  perception,  does  it  become  material  for 
science.  In  truth,  the  field  of  science  is  much  more 
consciousness  than  an  external  world.  In  thus 
vindicating  for  science  its  mission  as  interpreter  of 
conceptions  rather  than  as  investigator  of  a  "  natural 
law  "  ruling  an  "  external  world  of  material,"  I  must 
remind  the  reader  that  science  still  considers  the 
whole  contents  of  the  mind  to  be  ultimately  based  on 
sense-impressions.  Without  sense-impressions  there 
would  be  no  consciousness,  no  conceptions  for  science 
to  deal  with.  In  the  next  place  we  must  be  careful 
to  note  that  not  every  conception,  still  less  every 
inference,  has  scientific  validity. 


64  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

§  7. —  The  Scientific  Validity  of  a  Conception. 

In   order   that   a   conception    may  have   scientific 

!  validity,  it  must  be  self-consistent,  and  deducible  from 
the  perceptions  of  the  normal  human  being.  For 
instance,  a  centaur  is  not  a  self-consistent  conception  ; 
as  soon  as  our  knowledge  of  human  and  equine 
anatomy  became  sufficiently  developed,  the  centaur 
became  an  unthinkable  thing — a  self-negating  idea. 
As  the  man-horse  is  seen  to  be  a  compound  of  sense- 
impressions,  which  are  irreconcilable  anatomically,  so 
the  man-god,  whose  cruder  type  is  Hercules,  is  also 
seen  to  be  a  chimera,  a  self-contradictory  conception, 
as  soon  as  we  have  clearly  defined  the  physical  and 
mental  characteristics  of  man.  But  even  if  an 
individual  mind  has  reached  a  conception,  which  at 
any  rate  for  that  mind  is  perfectly  self-consistent,  it 
does  not  follow  that  such  a  conception  must  have 
scientific  validity,  except  as  far  as  science  may  be 
concerned  with  the  analysis  of  that  individual  mind. 
When  a  person  conceives  that  one  colour — green — 
suffices  to  describe  the  flowers  and  leaves  of  a  rose- 
tree  in  my  garden,  I  know  that  his  conception  may 
*  not,  after  all,  be  self-inconsistent,  it  may  be  in  perfect 
harmony  with  his  sense-impressions.  I  merely  assert 
that  his  perceptive  faculty  is  abnormal,  and  hold  him 
to  be  colour-blind.  I  may  study  the  individual 
abnormality  scientifically,  but  his  conception  has  no 
scientific  validity,  for  it  is  not  deducible  from  the 
perceptions  of  the  normal  human  being.  Here 
indeed  we  have  to  proceed  very  cautiously  if  we  are 
to  determine  what  self-consistent  conceptions  have 
scientific  validity.  Above  all,  we  must  note  that  a 
conception  does  not  cease  to  be  valid  because  it  has 
not  been  deduced  by  the  majority  of  normal  human 


THE  FACTS  OF   SCIENCE.  6$ 

beings  from  their  perceptions.  The  conception  that  a 
new  individual  originates  in  the  union  of  a  male  and 
female  cell  may  never  have  actually  been  deduced  by 
a  majority  of  normal  human  beings  from  their  per- 
ceptions.  But  if  any  normal  human  being  be  trained 
in  the  proper  methods  of  observation,  and  be  placed 
in  the  right  circumstances  for  investigating,  he  will 
draw  from  his  perceptions  this  conception  and  not  its 
negation.  It  is  in  this  sense,  therefore,  that  we  are  to 
understand  the  assertion  that  a  conception  to  have  a 
scientific  validity  must  be  deducible  from  the  percep-  j 
tions  of  the  normal  human  being. 

The  preceding  paragraph  shows  us  how  important 
it  is  that  the  observations  and  experiments  of  science 
should  be  repeated  as  often  and  by  as  many  observers 
as  possible,  in  order  to  ensure  that  we  are  dealing 
with  what  has  validity  for  all  normal  human  beings, 
and  not  with  the  results  of  an  abnormal  perceptive 
faculty.  It  is  not  only,  however,  in  experiments  or 
observations  which  can  be  repeated  easily,  but  still 
more  in  those  which  it  is  very  difficult  or  impossible 
to  repeat  that  a  great  weight  of  responsibility  lies 
upon  the  recorder  and  the  public  which  is  called 
upon  to  accept  his  results.  An  event  may  have 
occurred  in  the  presence  of  a  limited  number  of 
observers.  That  the  event  itself  cannot  recur,  and 
is  totally  out  of  accord  with  our  customary  ex- 
perience, are  not  sufficient  grounds  for  disregarding 
it  scientifically.  Yet  what  an  onus  is  laid  on  the 
individual  observers  to  test  whether  their  perceptive 
faculties  were  normal  on  the  occasion,  and  whether 
their  conceptions  of  what  took  place  were  justified  by 
their  perceptions  !  Still  greater  onus  is  laid  on  men 
at  large  to  criticize  and  probe  the  evidence  given 

6 


66  THE   GRAMMAR  OF    SCIENCE. 

by  such   observers,  to  question  whether   they  were 
men  trained  to  observe,  and  calm  and  collected  at 
the   time   of  the   reported    event.     Were    they   not, 
perhaps,  in  an  exalted  state  of  mind,  biased  by  pre- 
conceptions or  hindered  by  the  physical  surroundings 
from  clear  perception  ?     In   short,  were  or  were  not 
their  perceptive  faculties  in  a  normal  condition  and 
under   normal    circumstances?      It   can    scarcely   be 
questioned   that  when  the  truth  or  falsehood   of  an 
event  or  observation  may  have  important  bearings  on 
conduct,  over- doubt  is  more  socially   valuable  than 
over-credulity.1      In   an   age   like  our  own,  which  is 
essentially   an    age  of  scientific   inquiry,   the  preva- 
lence of  doubt  and  criticism  ought  not  to  be  regarded 
with  despair  or  as  a  sign  of  decadence.     It  is  one  of 
the  safeguards  of  progress  ; — la  critique  est  la  vie  de  la 
science,  we  must  again  repeat.     One  of  the  most  fatal 
(and  not  so  impossible)  futures  for  science,  would  be 
the  institution  of  a  scientific  hierarchy  which  would 


1  A  good  example  of  another  class  of  experiment,  that  which  it  is 
difficult  or  unadvisable  to  repeat  frequently,  may  be  drawn  from  Brovvn- 
Sequard's  researches  on  the  inheritance  by  guinea-pigs  of  diseases 
acquired  by  their  parents  during  life.  These  researches  were  con- 
ducted on  a  large  scale  and  with  great  expenditure  of  time  and  animal 
life.  (Brown-Sequard  kept  upwards  of  five  hundred  guinea-pigs  at  once. ) 
Yet  we  must  confess  that  if  these  experiments  were  conducted  with 
every  precaution  that  self-criticism  might  suggest,  the  "degrading  effect  " 
of  inflicting  disease  and  pain  on  this  large  amount  of  animal  life  would 
have  been  more  than  compensated  by  the  light  which  the  experiments 
might  have  cast  on  the  socially  important  problem  of  the  inheritance  of 
acquired  characteristics.  Unfortunately  Brown-Sequard's  conceptions 
and  inferences  do  not  appear  to  many  biologists  valid,  and  there  lies 
upon  this  investigator  the  onus  of  proving  that  (i)  all  possible  precau- 
tions for  the  accuracy  of  the  results  were  actually  taken,  and  (2),  being 
taken,  that  the  experiments  were  such  as  could  reasonably  have  been 
supposed  capable  of  solving  the  problems  proposed. 


THE   FACTS   OF   SCIENCE.  67 

brand  as  heretical  all  doubt  as  to  its  conclusions,  all 
criticism  of  its  results. 

§  S.—  T/ie  Scientific  Validity  of  an  Inference. 

Much  of  what  we  have  just  said  with  regard  to  the 
scientific  validity  of  conceptions  holds  with  regard  to 
the  scientific  validity  of  inferences,  for  conceptions 
pass  imperceptibly  into  inferences.  The  scope  of  the 
present  work  will  only  permit  us  to  discuss  briefly  the 
limits  of  legitimate  inference  and  induction.  For  a 
fuller  discussion  the  reader  must  be  referred  to  treatises 
on  logic,  in  particular  to  the  chapters  on  inference 
and  induction  in  Stanley  Jevons'  Principles  of  Science 
(chapters  iv.-vii.,  x.-xii.,  especially).  In  the  first 
place  the  inference  which  is  scientifically  valid  is 
that  which  could  be  drawn  by  every  logically  trained 
normal  mind,  if  it  were  in  possession  of  the  concep- 
tions upon  which  the  inference  has  been  based. 
Stress  must  here  be  laid  on  the  distinction  between 
"  could  be  drawn  "  and  "  actually  would  be  drawn." 
There  are  many  minds  which  have  clearly  defined 
conceptions,  but  refuse  either  from  inertia  or  emo- 
.tional  bias  to  draw  the  inferences  from  them  which 
can  be  drawn.  A  scientific  inference — witness 
Darwin's  natural  selection, — however  logical,  often 
takes  years  to  overcome  the  inertia  of  the  scientific 
world  itself,  and  longer  still  may  be  the  period  before 
it  forms  an  essential  factor  of  the  thought  of  the 
majority  of  normal- minded  human  beings.  Yet, 
while  logically  trained  minds  which  are  able  to 
draw  inferences  frequently  neglect  to  do  so,  the 
illogically  trained,  on  the  other  hand,  unfortunately 
devote  a  large  part  of  their  ill-regulated  energies  to 
the  production  of  cobwebs  of  inference  ;  and  this 


68  THE   GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

with  such  rapidity  that  the  logical  broom  fails  to 
keep  pace  with  their  activity.  The  mediaeval  super- 
stitions are  scarce  discredited,  before  they  reappear 
as  theosophy  or  spiritualism. 

The  assumption  which  lies  at  the  bottom  of  most 
popular  fallacious  inference  might  pass  without 
reference,  for  it  is  obviously  absurd,  were  it  not, 
alas  !  so  widely  current.  The  assumption  is  simply 
this  :  that  the  strongest  argument  in  favour  of  the 
truth  of  a  statement  is  the  absence  or  impossibility 
of  a  demonstration  of  its  falsehood.  Let  us  note 
some  of  its  products : — All  the  constituents  of  material 
bodies  are  to  be  found  in  the  atmosphere ;  it  is  im- 
possible to  assert  that  these  constituents  could  not 
be  brought  together.1  Ergo,  the  Mahatmas  of  Thibet, 
can  take  upon  themselves  material  forms  in  St.  John's 
Wood. — Science  cannot  demonstrate  that  the  uniform 
action  of  material  causes  precludes  the  hypothesis  of 
a  benevolent  Creator.  Ergo>  the  impulses  and  hopes 
of  men  receive  confirmation  from  science. — Conscious- 
ness is  found  associated  with  matter ;  we  cannot 
demonstrate  that  consciousness  is  riot  found  with 
all  forms  of  matter.  Ergot  all  matter  is  conscious, 
or  matter  and  mind  are  never  found  except  in  con- 
junction, and  we  may  legitimately  speak  of  the  "  con- 
sciousness of  society  "  and  the  "  consciousness  of  the 
universe."  These  are  but  a  few  samples  of  the 
current  method  of  fallacious  inference — usually,  be 
it  remarked,  screened  beneath  an  unlimited  flow  of 
words,  and  not  thus  exhibited  in  its  naked  absurdity. 
When  we  recognize  how  widely  inferences  of  this 

1  "That  is  a  noteworthy  fact  which  I  have  not  fully  appreciated 
before,"  remarks  the  untrained  mind,  and  is  already  more  than  half- 
converted  to  thecsophy. 


THE   FACTS   OF   SCIENCE.  69 

character  affect  conduct  in  life,  and  yet  grasp  how 
unstable  must  be  the  basis  of  such  conduct,  how 
liable  to  be  shaken  to  the  foundations  by  the  first 
stout  logical  breeze,  then  we  understand  how  honest 
doubt  is  far  healthier  for  the  community,  is  more 
social,  than  unthinking  inference,  light-hearted  and 
over-ready  belief.  Doubt  is  at  least  the  first  stage 
towards  scientific  inquiry  ;  and  it  is  better  by  far  to 
have  reached  that  stage  than  to  have  made  no 
intellectual  progress  whatever. 

§  9. — The  Limits  to  Other-Consciousness. 

We  cannot  better  illustrate  the  limits  of  legitimate 
inference  than  by  considering  the  example  we  have 
last  cited,  and  asking  how  far  we  may  infer  the 
existence  of  consciousness  and  of  thought.  We 
have  seen  (p.  52)  that  consciousness  is  associated 
with  the  process  which  may  intervene  in  the  brain 
between  the  receipt  of  a  sense-impression  from  a 
sensory  nerve  and  the  dispatch  of  a  stimulus  to 
action  through  a  motor  nerve.  Consciousness  is 
thus  associated  with  machinery  of  a  certain  cha- 
racter, which  we  term  the  brain  and  nerves.  Further, 
it  depends  upon  the  lapse  of  an  interval  between 
sense-impression  and  exertion,  this  interval  being 
filled,  as  it  were,  with  the  mutual  resonance  and  cling- 
clang  of  stored  sense-impresses  and  the  conceptions 
drawn  from  them.  Where  no  like  machinery,  no  like 
interval  can  be  observed,  there  we  have  no  right  to 
infer  any  consciousness.  In  our  fellow- men  we 
observe  this  same  machinery  and  the  like  interval, 
and  we  infer  consciousness,  it  may  be  as  an  eject, 
but  as  an  eject  which,  as  we  have  seen  (p.  60),  might  not 
inconceivably,  however  improbably,  become  some  day 


76  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

an  object.  In  the  lower  forms  of  life  we  observe 
machinery  approximately  like  our  own,  and  a  shorter 
and  shorter  interval  between  sense-impression  and 
exertion  ;  we  may  reasonably  infer  consciousness,  if 
in  reduced  intensity.  We  cannot,  indeed,  put  our 
finger  on  a  definite  type  of  life  and  say  here  con- 
sciousness ends,  but  it  is  completely  illogical  to  infer 
its  existence  where  we  can  find  no  interval  between 
sense-impression  and  exertion,  or  where  we  can  find 
no  nervous  system.  Because  we  cannot  point  to  the 
exact  form  of  material  life  at  which  consciousness 
ceases,  we  have  no  more  right  to  infer  that  conscious- 
ness is  associated  with  all  life,  still  less  with  all  forms 
of  matter,  than  we  have  to  infer  that  there  must 
always  be  wine  mixed  with  water,  because  so  little 
wine  can  be  mixed  with  water  that  we  are  unable  to 
detect  its  presence.  Will,  too,  as  we  have  seen,  is 
closely  connected  with  consciousness  ;  it  is  the  feel- 
ing in  our  individual  selves  when  exertion  flows  from 
the  stored  sense-impresses  "  within  us,"  and  not  from 
the  immediate  sense-impression  which  we  term  "  with- 
out us."  We  are  justified,  therefore,  in  inferring  the 
feeling  of  will  as  well  as  consciousness  in  nervous 
systems  more  or  less  akin  to  our  own ;  we  may  throw 
them  out  from  ourselves,  eject  them  into  certain  forms 
of  material  life.  But  those  who  eject  them  into 
matter,  where  no  nervous  system  can  be  found,  or 
even  into  existences  which  they  postulate  as  im- 
material, are  not  only  exceeding  enormously  the 
bounds  of  scientific  inference,  but  forming  concep- 
tions which,  like  that  of  the  centaur,  are  inconsistent 
in  themselves.  From  will  and  consciousness  associated 
with  material  machinery,  we  can  infer  nothing  what- 
ever as  to  will  and  consciousness  without  that 


THE   FACTS   OF   SCIENCE.  71 

machinery.  We  are  passing  by  the  trick  of  a 
common-name  to  things  of  which  we  can  postulate 
absolutely  nothing,  and  of  which  we  are  only  unable 
to  deny  the  existence  when  we  give  to  that  term  a 
meaning  wholly  opposed  to  the  customary  one.1 

§  10. — The  Canons  of  Legitimate  Inference. 

We  cannot  here  discuss  more  fully  the  limits  of 
belief  and  legitimate  inference.  We  shall,  however, 
to  some  extent  return  to  the  subject  when  considering 
Causation  and  Probability  in  Chapter  IV.  But  it  may 
not  be  without  service  to  state  certain  canons  of 
legitimate  inference  with  a  few  explanatory  remarks, 
leaving  the  reader,  if  he  so  desire,  to  pursue  the 
subject  further  in  Stanley  Jevons'  Principles  of  Science, 
or  in  Clifford's  essay  on  The  EtJiics  of  Belief.  We 
ought  first  to  notice  that  the  use  of  the  word  belief  in 
our  language  is  changing :  formerly  it  denoted  some- 
thing taken  as  definite  and  certain  on  the  basis  of 
some  external  authority ;  now  it  has  grown  rather  to 
denote  credit  given  to  a  statement  on  a  more  or  less 
sufficient  balancing  of  probabilities.2 

The  change  in  usage  marks  the  gradual  transition  of 
the  basis  of  conviction  from  uncriticizing  faith  to 

1  Consciousness  without  a  nervous  system  is   like  a  horse  without 
a  belly — a   chimera,   of  which   in   customary  language   we  deny   the 
"existence."     We  cannot  demonstrate  that   a  horse  without  a  belly 
may  not   exist  "  outside "   the   physical  universe,   only  it  would   not 
be  a  horse  and  would  exist  "  nowhere."     The  existence  of  something 
of  which  we  can  postulate  nothing  at  nowhere  can  never  be  inferred 
from  conceptions  based  on  sense-impressions.     Such  a  horse  would  be 
like  Meister  Eckehart's  deity  who  was  a  non-god,  a  non-spirit,  a  non- 
person,  a  non-idea,  and  of  whom,  he  says,  any  assertion  must  be  more 
false  than  true. 

2  Compare  the  older  use  in  Biblical  passages,  such  as  "Jacob's  heart 


72  THE   GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

weighed  probability.    The  canons  we  have  referred  to 
are  the  following : — 

1.  Where  it  is  impossible  to  apply  man's  reason, 
that  is  to  criticize  and  investigate  at  all,  there  it  is  not 
only  unprofitable,  but  antisocial  to  believe. 

Belief  is  thus  to  be  looked  upon  as  an  adjunct  to 
knowledge :  as  a  guide  to  action  where  decision  is 
needful,  but  the  probability  is  not  so  overwhelming  as 
to  amount  to  knowledge.  To  believe  in  a  sphere 
where  we  cannot  reason  is  antisocial,  for  it  is  a  matter 
of  common  experience  that  such  belief  prejudices 
action  in  spheres  where  we  can  reason. 

2.  We  may  infer  what  we  cannot  verify  by  direct 
sense-impression    only  when    the   inference   is   from 
known  things  to  unknown  things  of  the  like  nature 
in  similar  surroundings. 

Thus  we  may  not  infer  an  "  infinite  "  consciousness 
outside  the  physical  surroundings  of  finite  conscious- 
ness ;  we  may  not  infer  man  in  the  moon,  however 
like  in  nature  to  ourselves,  because  the  physical  sur- 
roundings in  the  moon  are  not  such  as  we  find  man  in 
here,  &c.,  &c. 

3.  We  may  infer  the  truth  of  tradition  when    its 
contents  are  of  like  character  and  continuous  with 
men's  present  experience,  and  when  there  is  reason- 
able ground  for  supposing  its  source  to  lie  in  persons 
knowing  the  facts  and  reporting  what  they  knew. 

The  tradition  that  Wellington  and  Bliicher  won  the 
battle  of  Waterloo  fulfils  the  necessary  conditions, 

fainted  for  he  believed  them  not,"  and  "Except  ye  see  signs  and 
wonders  ye  will  not  believe,"  or  in  Locke's  definition  of  belief  as 
adherence  to  a  proposition  of  which  one  is  persuaded  but  does  not  know 
to  be  true,  with  such  modern  usage  as :  "I  believe  that  you  will  find  a 
Cab  on  the  stand,  and  that  the  train  starts  at  half-past  eight." 


THE   FACfS   OF   SCIENCE.  ?$ 

while  the  miracle  of  Karl  the  Great  and  the  adder 
fulfils  neither  condition. 

4.  While  it  is  reasonable  in  the  minor  actions  of 
life,  where  rapidity  of  decision  is  important,  to  infer 
on  slight  evidence  and  believe  on  small  balances  of 
probability,  it  is  opposed  to  the  true  interests  of 
society  to  take  as  a  permanent  standard  of  conduct 
a  belief  based  on  inadequate  testimony. 

This  canon  suggests  that  the  acceptance,  as  habitual 
guides  to  conduct,  of  beliefs  based  on  insufficient 
evidence,  must  lead  to  the  want  of  a  proper  sense  of 
the  individual's  responsibility  for  the  important  deci- 
sions of  life.  I  have  no  right  to  believe  at  seven 
o'clock  that  a  cab  will  be  on  the  stand  at  eight  o'clock, 
if  my  catching  the  train  at  half-past  is  of  vital  impor- 
tance to  others. 

§  ii. — The  External  Universe. 

Before  we  draw  from  our  present  discussion  any 
conclusions  as  to  the  facts  of  science  we  must  return 
once  more  to  the  immediate  sense-impression  and 
examine  its  nature  a  little  more  closely.  We  are 
accustomed  to  talk  of  the  "external  world,"  of  the 
"  reality  "  outside  us.  We  speak  of  individual  objects 
having  an  existence  independent  of  our  own.  Stored 
sense -impressions,  our  thoughts  and  memories, 
although  most  probably  they  have  beside  their  psy- 
chical element  a  close  correspondence  with  some  phy- 
sical change  or  impress  in  the  brain,  are  yet  spoken  of 
as  inside  ourselves.  On  the  other  hand,  although 
if  a  sensory  nerve  be  divided  anywhere  short  of  the 
brain  we  lose  the  corresponding  sense-impression,  we 
yet  speak  of  many  sense-impressions  such  as  form 


?4  THE   GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

and  texture  as  existing  outside  ourselves.  How  close 
can  we  then  actually  get  to  this  supposed  world  out- 
side ourselves?  Just  as  near  as  but  no  nearer  than 
the  brain  terminals  of  the  sensory  nerves.  We  are 
like  the  clerk  in  the  central  telephone  exchange  who 
cannot  get  nearer  to  his  customers  than  his  end  of 
the  telephone  wires.  We  are,  indeed,  worse  off  than 
the  clerk,  for  to  carry  out  the  analogy  properly  we 
must  suppose  him  never  to  have  been  outside  the 
telephone  exchange,  never  to  have  seen  a  customer  or 
any  one  like  a  customer — in  short,  never,  except  through 
tfie  telephone  wire,  to  haie  come  in  contact  with  the  out- 
side universe.  Of  that  "  real "  universe  outside  himself 
he  would  be  able  to  form  no  direct  impression ;  the 
real  universe  for  him  would  be  the  messages  which 
flowed  from  the  ends  of  the  telephone  wires  in  his 
office.  About  those  messages  and  the  ideas  raised 
in  his  mind  by  them  he  might  reason  and  draw  his 
inferences  ;  and  his  conclusions  would  be  correct — for 
what  ?  For  the  world  of  telephonic  messages,  for  the 
type  of  messages  which  go  through  the  telephone. 
Something  definite  and  valuable  he  might  know  with 
regard  to  the  spheres  of  action  and  of  thought  of  his 
telephonic  subscribers,  but  outside  those  spheres  he 
could  have  no  experience.  Pent  up  in  his  office  he 
could  never  have  seen  or  touched  even  a  telephonic 
subscriber  in  himself.  Very  much  in  the  position  of 
such  a  telephonic  clerk  is  the  conscious  ego  of  each 
one  of  us  seated  at  the  brain  terminals  of  the  sensory 
nerves.  Not  a  step  nearer  than  those  terminals  can 
the  ego  get  to  the  "  outer  world,"  and  what  in  and 
for  themselves  are  the  subscribers  to  its  nerve  ex- 
change it  has  no  means  of  ascertaining.  Messages  in 
the  form  of  sense-impressions  come  flowing  in  from 


THE   FACTS   OF   SCIENCE.  ?]> 

that  "  outside  world  "  and  these  we  analyze,  classify, 
store  up,  and  reason  about.  But  of  the  nature  of 
"  things-in-themselves "  of  what  may  exist  at  the 
other  end  of  our  system  of  telephone  wires  we  know 
nothing. 

But  the  reader,  perhaps,  remarks,  "  I  not  only  see 
an  object,  but  I  can  touch  it.  I  can  trace  the  nerve  from 
the  tip  of  my  finger  to  the  brain.  I  am  not  like  the  tele- 
phone clerk,  I  can  follow  my  network  of  wires  to  their 
terminals  and  find  what  is  at  the  other  end  of  them." 
Can  you,  reader  ?  Think  for  a  moment  whether  your  ego 
has  for  one  moment  got  away  from  his  brain-exchange. 
The  sense-impression  that  you  call  touch  was  just  as 
much  as  sight  felt  only  at  the  brain  end  of  a  sensory 
nerve.  What  has  told  you  also  of  the  nerve  from  the  tip 
of  your  finger  to  your  brain  ?  Why  sense-impressions 
also,  messages  conveyed  along  optic  or  tactile  sensory 
nerves.  In  truth,  all  you  have  been  doing  is  to 
employ  one  subscriber  to  your  telephone  exchange  to 
tell  you  about  the  wire  that  goes  to  a  second,  but  you 
are  just  as  far  as  ever  from  tracing  out  for  yourself 
the  telephone  wires  to  the  individual  subscriber  and 
ascertaining  what  his  nature  is  in  and  for  himself. 
The  immediate  sense-impression  is  just  as  far  removed 
from  what  you  term  the  "  outside  world  "  as  the  stored 
impress.  If  our  telephone  clerk  had  recorded  by  aid 
of  a  phonograph  certain  of  the  messages  from  the 
outside  world  on  past  occasions,  then  if  any  telephonic 
message  on  its  receipt  set  several  phonographs  re- 
peating past  messages,  we  have  an  image  analogous 
to  what  goes  on  in  the  brain.  Both  telephone  and 
phonograph  are  equally  removed  from  what  the  clerk 
might  call  the  "  real  outside  world,"  but  they  enable 
him  through  their  sounds  to  construct  a  universe ;  he 


76  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

projects  those  sounds,  which  are  really  inside  his  office, 
outside  his  office  and  speaks  of  them  as  the  external 
universe.  This  outside  world  is  constructed  by  him 
from  the  contents  of  the  inside  sounds,  which  differ 
as  widely  from  things-in-themselves,  as  language, 
the  symbol,  must  always  differ  from  the  thing  it 
symbolizes.  For  our  telephone  clerk  sounds  would 
be  the  real  world,  and  yet  we  can  see  how  conditioned 
and  limited  it  would  be  by  the  range  of  his  particular 
telephone  subscribers  and  by  the  contents  of  their 
messages. 

So  it  is  with  our  brain  ;  the  sounds  from  telephone 
and  phonograph  correspond  to  immediate  and  stored 
sense-impressions.  These  sense-impressions  we  pro- 
ject as  it  were  outwards  and  term  the  real  world  outside 
ourselves.  But  the  things-in-themselves  which  the 
sense-impressions  symbolize,  the  "reality,"  as  the 
metaphysicians  wish  .to  call  it,  at  the  other  end  of  the 
nerve  remains  unknown  and  is  unknowable.  Reality 
of  the  external  world  lies  for  science  and  for  us  in 
form 'and  colour  and  touch — sense-impressions  as 
widely  divergent  from  the  thing  "  at  the  other  end  of 
the  nerve  "  as  the  sound  of  the  telephone  from  the  sub- 
scriber at  the  other  end  of  the  wire.  We  are  cribbed 
and  confined  in  this  world  of  sense-impressions  like 
the  exchange  clerk  in  his  world  of  sounds,  and  not  a 
step  beyond  can  we  get.  As  his  world  is  conditioned 
and  limited  by  his  particular  network  of  wires,  so  ours 
is  conditioned  by  our  nervous  system,  by  our  organs 
of  sense.  Their  peculiarities  determine  what  is  the 
nature  of  the  outside  world  which  we  construct. 
It  is  the  similarity  in <  the  organs  of  sense  and  in  the 
perceptive  faculty  of  all  normal  human  beings  which 
makes  the  outside  world  the  same,  or  practically  the 


THE   FACTS   OF   SCIENCE.  .  77 

same  for  them  all.1  To  return  to  the  old  analogy,  it 
is  as  if  two  telephone  exchanges  had  very  nearly 
identical  groups  of  subscribers.  In  this  case  a  wire 
between  the  two  exchanges  would  soon  convince  the 
imprisoned  clerks  that  they  had  something  in  common 
and  peculiar  to  themselves.  That  conviction  cor- 
responds in  our  comparison  to  the  recognition  of  other- 
consciousness. 

§  12. — Outside  and  Inside  Myself. 

We  are  now  in  a  position  to  see  clearly  what  is 
meant  by  "  reality"  and  the  "  external  world."  Any 
group  of  immediate  sense-impressions  we  project  out- 
side ourselves  and  hold  to  be  part  of  the  external 
world.  As  such  we  call  it  a  phenomenon,  and  in  practical 
life  term  it  real.  Together  with  the  immediate  sense- 
impression  we  often  include  stored  sense-impresses, 
which  experience  has  taught  us  to  associate  with  the 
immediate  sense-impression.  Thus  we  assume  the 
blackboard  to  be  hard,  although  we  may  only  have 
seen  its  shape  and  colour.  What  we  term  the  real 
world  is  thus  partly  based  on  immediate  sense- 
impressions,  partly  on  stored  sense-impresses  ;  it  is 
what  has  been  called  a  construct.  For  an  individual 
the  distinction  between  the  real  world  and  his  thought 
of  it  is  the  presence  of  some  immediate  sense-impres- 
sion. Thus  the  distinction  of  what  is  "outside"  and 
what  is  "  inside "  myself  at  any  instant  depends 
entirely  on  the  amount  of  immediate  sense-impres- 
sion. This  has  been  very  cleverly  represented  by  the 
well-known  German  scientist,  Professor  Ernst  Mach, 

1  Not  exactly  the  same,  for  the  range  of  the  organs  of  sense  and  the 
powers  of  perception  vary  somewhat  with  different  individual  men,  and 
probably  enormously,  if  we  take  other  life  into  account. 


?S  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

in  the  accompanying  sketch.  The  professor  is  lying 
on  his  sofa,  and  having  closed  his  right  eye,  the  picture 
represents  what  is  presented  to  his  left  eye : — 

"  In  a  frame  formed  by  the  ridge  of  my  eyebrow,  by 


FIG.  T. 

my  nose,  and  my  moustache,  appears  a  part  of  my 
body,  so  far  as  it  is  visible,  and  also  the  things  and 
space  about  it.  ...  If  I  observe  an  element,  A,  within 
my  field  of  vision,  and  investigate  its  connection  with 
another  element,  B,  within  the  same  field,  I  go  out  of 


THE   FACTS   OF   SCIENCE.  79 

the  domain  of  physics  into  that  of  physiology  or 
psychology,  if  B,  to  use  the  apposite  expression  that 
a  friend  of  mine  employed  upon  seeing  this  drawing, 
passes  through  my  skin."  x 

From  our  standpoint,  neglecting  for  simplicity  the 
immediate  contributions  of  any  other  senses  than  that 
of  sight,  the  picture  represents  that  part  of  the  Pro- 
fessor's sense-impressions  which  for  the  instant  forms 
his  "  outside  world  "  ;  the  rest  was  "  inside  " — existed 
for  him  only  as  stored  sense-impresses. 

There  is  no  better  exercise  for  the  mind  than  the 
endeavour  to  reduce  the  perception  we  have  of  "  ex- 
ternal things  "  down  to  the  simple  sense-impressions 
by  which  we  feel  them.  The  arbitrary  distinction 
between  outside  and  inside  ourselves  is  then  clearly 
seen  to  be  one  merely  of  everyday  practical  con- 
venience. Take  a  needle  ;  we  say  it  is  thin,  bright, 
pointed,  and  so  forth.  What  are  these  properties  but 
a  group  of  sense-impressions  relating  to  form  and 
colour  associated  with  conceptions  drawn  from  past 
sense-impressions  ?  Their  immediate  source  is  the 
activity  of  certain  optic  nerves.  These  sense-impres- 
sions form  for  us  the  reality  of  the  needle.  Neverthe- 
less, they  and  the  resulting  construct  are  projected 
outside  ourselves,  and  supposed  to  reside  in  an  external 
thing,  "the  needle."  Now  by  mischance  we  run  the 
needle  into  our  finger ;  another  nerve  is  excited  and 
an  unpleasant  sense-impression,  one  which  we  term 
painful,  arises.  This,  on  the  other  hand,  we  term  "  in 
ourselves,"  and  do  not  project  into  the  needle.  Yet  the 
colour  and  form  which  constitute  for  us  the  needle 
are  just  as  much  sense-impressions  within  us  as  the 

1  "  The  Analysis  of  the  Sensations — Anti-metaphysical,"  The  Monist, 
vol.  i.  p.  59. 


80  THE   GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

pain  produced  by  its  prick.  The  distinction  between 
ourselves  and  the  outside  world  is  thus  only  an  arbi- 
trary, if  a  practically  convenient,  division  between  one 
type  of  sense-impression  and  another.  The  group  of 
sense-impressions  forming  what  I  term  myself  is  only 
a  small  subdivision  of  the  vast  world  of  sense- impres- 
sions. My  arm  is  paralyzed,  I  still  term  it  part  of 
me  ;  it  mortifies,  I  am  not  quite  so  certain  whether  it 
is  to  be  called  part  of  me  or  not ;  the  surgeon  cuts 
it  off,  it  now  ceases  to  be  a  part  of  that  group  of 
sense-impressions  which  I  term  "  myself."  Obviously 
the  distinction  between  "  outside  "  and  "  inside,"  be- 
tween one  individuality  and  a  second,  is  only  a 
practical  one.  How  many  of  the  group  of  sense- 
impressions  we  term  a  tree  are  light  and  atmosphere 
effects  ?  What  might  be  termed  the  limits  of  the 
group  of  sense-impressions  which  we  term  an  indi- 
vidual cannot  be  scientifically  drawn.  But  to  this 
point  we  shall  return  later. 

§  13. — Sensations  as    the    Ultimate   Source  of  the  Materials 
of  Knoivledge. 

When  we  find  that  the  mind  is  entirely  limited  to 
the  one  source,  sense-impression,  for  its  contents,  that 
it  can  classify  and  analyze,  associate  and  construct 
but  always  with  this  same  material,  either  in  its  im- 
mediate or  stored  form,  then  it  is  not  difficult  to 
understand  what,  and  what  only,  can  be  the  facts  of 
science,  the  subject-matter  of  knowledge.  Science, 
we  say  at  once,  deals  with  conceptions  drawn  from 
sense-impressions,  and  its  legitimate  field  is  the  whole 
content  of  the  human  mind.  Those  who  assert  that 
science  deals  with  the  world  of  external  phenomena 
are  only  stating  a  half-truth.  Science  only  appeals  to 


THE   FACTS   OF   SCIENCE.  8 1 

the  world  of  phenomena — to  immediate  sense-impres- 
sions— with  the  view  of  testing  and  verifying  the 
accuracy  of  its  conceptions  and  inferences,  the  ultimate 
basis  of  which  lies  as  we  have  seen  in  such  immediate 
sense-impressions.  Science  deals  with  the  mental,  the 
"  inside  "  world,  and  the  aim  of  its  processes  of  classi- 
fication and  inference  is  precisely  that  of  instinctive 
or  mechanical  association,  namely,  to  enable  the 
exertion,  best  calculated  to  preserve  the  race  and  the 
individual,  to  follow  on  the  sense-impression  with  the 
least  expenditure  of  time  and  of  intellectual  energy. 
Science  is  in  this  respect  an  economy  of  thought — 
a  delicate  tuning  in  the  interests  of  the  mind  of  the 
organs  which  receive  sense-impressions  and  those 
which  expedite  activity. 

Turn  the  problem  round  and  ponder  over  it  as  we 
will,  beyond  the  sense- impression,  beyond  the  brain 
terminals  of  the  sensory  nerves  we  cannot  get.  Of 
what  is  beyond  them,  of  "  things-in-themselves," 
as  the  metaphysicians  term  them,  we  can  know 
but  one  characteristic,  and  this  we  can  only  de- 
scribe as  a  capacity  for  producing  sense-impressions, 
for  sending  messages  along  the  sensory  nerves 
to  the  brain.  This  is  the  sole  scientific  state- 
ment which  can  be  made  with  regard  to  what  lies 
beyond  sense-impressions.  But  even  in  this  state- 
ment we  must  be  careful  to  analyze  our  meaning. 
The  methods  of  classification  and  inference,  which 
hold  for  sense-impressions  and  for  the  conceptions 
based  upon  them,  cannot  be  projected  outside  our 
minds,  away  from  the  sphere  in  which  we  know  them 
to  hold,  into  a  sphere  which  we  have  recognized  as 
unknown  and  unknowable.  The  laws,  if  we  can 
speak  of  laws,  of  this  sphere  must  be  as  unknown  as 

7 


82  THE  GRAMMAR   Of   SCIENCE. 

its  contents,  and  therefore  to  talk  of  its  contents  as 
producing  sense-impressions  is  an  unwarranted  in- 
ference, for  we  are  asserting  cause  and  effect — a  law  of 
phenomena  or  sense-impressions — to  hold  in  a  region 
beyond  our  experience.1  We  knoiv  ourselves,  and  we 
know  around  us  an  impenetrable  wall  of  sense-impres- 
sions. There  is  no  necessity,  nay,  not  even  logic,  in 
the  statement  that  behind  sense-impressions  there  are 
"  things-in-themselves"  producing  sense-impressions. 
Of  this  supersensuous  sphere  we  may  philosophize  and 
dogmatize  unprofitably,  but  we  can  never  know  use- 
fully. It  is  indeed  an  unjustifiable  extension  of  the 
term  knowledge  to  apply  it  to  something  which  can- 
not be  part  of  the  mind's  contents.  What  is  behind 
or  beyond  sense-impressions  may  or  may  not  be  of 
the  same  character  as  sense-impressions,  we  cannot 
say.  We  feel  the  surface  of  a  body  to  be  soft,  but  its 
core  may  be  either  hard  or  soft,  we  cannot  say  ;  we 
can  only  legitimately  call  it  a  soft-surfaced  body.  So 
it  is  with  sense-impressions  and  what  may  be  behind 
them;  we  can  only  say  sense-impression-stuff,  or,  as 
we  shall  term  it,  with  a  somewhat  divergent  meaning 
from  the  customary,  sensation.  By  sensation  we  shall 
accordingly  understand  that  of  which  the  only  know- 
able  side  is  sense-impression.  Our  object  in  using 
the  word  sensation  instead  of  sense-impression  will  be 
to  express  our  ignorance,  our  absolute  agnosticism, 
as  to  whether  sense-impressions  are  "  produced  "  by 
unknowable  "  things  -  in  -  themselves,"  or  whether 
behind  them  may  not  be  something  of  their  own 
nature.2  The  outer  world  is  for  science  a  world  of 

1  This  will  appear  clearer  when  we  have  discussed  the  scientific 
meaning  of  cause  and  effect.     See  Chapter  IV. 

2  Herein   lies   the   arid   field  of  metaphysical   discussion.      Behind 


THE  FACTS   OF   SCIENCE.  83 

sensations,   and    sensation  is   known    to  us  only  as 
sense-impression. 

§  1 4. — Shadow  and  Reality. 

The  reader  who  comes  to  these  problems  for  the 
first  time  may  feel  inclined  to  assert  that  if  this  world 
of  sense-impressions  is  the  world  of  scientific  know- 
ledge, then  science  is  dealing  with  a  world  of  shadows 
and  not  of  real  substances.  And  yet,  if  such  a  reader 
will  think  over  what  happens  when  he  knocks  his 
elbow  against  the  table,  I  think  he  will  agree  that  it 
is  the  sense-impressions  of  hardness,  and  perhaps  of 
pain,  which  are  for  him  the  realities,  while  the  table, 
as  a  "  source  of  these  sense-impressions,"  is  the 
shadow.  Should  he  impatiently  retort :  "  I  see  the 
table — four-legged,  brass-handled,  with  black  oak  top 
shining  under  the  elbow-grease  of  a  past  generation 
— there  is  the  reality,"  let  him  stop  for  a  moment  to 
inquire  whether  his  reality  is  not  a  construct  from 
immediate  and  stored  sense-impressions,  of  exactly 
the  same  character  "as  the  previous  sense-impression 
of  hardness.  He  will  soon  convince  himself  that  the 
real  table  lies  for  him  in  the  permanent  association  of 
a  certain  group  of  sense-impressions,  and  that  the 
shadow  table  is  what  might  be  left  were  this  group 
abstracted. 

sense-impressions,  and  as  their  source,  the  materialists  place  Matter  ; 
Berkeley  placed  God ;  Kant,  and  after  him  Schopenhauer,  placed  Will; 
and  Clifford  placed  Mind-stuff.  Professor  E.  Mach  in  the  paper  referred 
to  on  p.  79  nas  reduced  the  outer  world  to  its  known  surface,  sense- 
impression,  which  he  terms  sensation — leaving  no  possible  unknowable 
plus  which  we  intend  to  signify  by  our  use  of  the  word  sensation. 
Such  a  theory  cannot  lead  to  scientific  error,  but  it  does  not  seem  a 
justifiable  inference  from  sense-impression.  The  variety  of  inferences 
cited  above  shows  the  quagmire  which  has  to  be  avoided,  especially 
when  the  inferences  are  drawn  with  a  view  of  influencing  judgment  in 
the  world  of  sense. 


84  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

Let  us  return  for  a  moment  to  our  old  friend  the 
blackboard,  represented  for  us  by  a  complex  of 
properties  (p.  48).  In  the  first  place  we  have 
size  and  shape,  then  colour  and  temperature,  and, 
lastly,  other  properties  like  hardness,  strength,  weight, 
&c.  Clearly  the  blackboard  consists  for  us  in  the 
permanent  association  of  these  properties,  in  a 
construct  from  our  sense-impressions.  Take  away 
the  size  and  shape,  leaving  all  the  other  pro- 
perties, and  the  group  has  ceased  to  be  the  black- 
board, whatever  else  it  may  be.  Suppose  the 
colour  to  go  and  again  the  blackboard  has  ceased 
to  be.  Finally,  if  the  hardness  and  weight  were  to 
vanish,  we  might  see  the  ghost  of  a  blackboard,  but 
we  should  soon  convince  ourselves  that  it  was  not  the 
"  reality "  we  had  termed  blackboard.  Now,  as  the 
reader  may  be  thinking  that  this  blackboard  has  had 
too  long  an  existence,  at  least  in  our  pages,  let  us 
employ  a  carpenter  to  pull  it  to  pieces  and  construct 
out  of  it  a  four-legged  table.  To  cloak  the  obvious 
deficiences  of  such  a  table  we  will  cause  it  to  be 
coated  with  a  thick  layer  of  Aspinall's  enamel.  We 
have  now  a  four-legged  red  table.  It  is  no  longer  a 
blackboard,  and  any  person  not  knowing  its  origin 
would  think  us  quite  mad  if  we  termed  it  a  black- 
board. We  should  probably,  however,  make  our- 
selves intelligible  to  him  by  stating  that  the  "  same 
material  "  as  was  once  in  a  blackboard  is  now  in  the 
red  table.  For  practical  purposes  this  is  very  proper 
and  convenient,  but  will  it  help  us  to  an  accurate  con- 
ception of  individuality,  if  we  say  the  blackboard  and 
the  table  are  the  same  thing  ?  New  paint  and  pro- 
bably nails  have  been  added  ;  the  carpenter  may 
have  supplied  some  additional  wood ;  nay,  more,  if 


THE   FACTS   OF   SCIENCE.  85 

we  begin  to  use  our  table  a  leg  may  come  off  and  a 
new  one  be  put  on  ;  after  a  time  a  fresh  top  would  be 
an  advantage,  thus  even  the  "  material  "  of  the  table 
may  cease  to  be  same  as  that  of  the  blackboard.  Or 
again,  since  our  table  is  probably  a  bad  one,  we  will 
break  it  up  and  burn  it,  and  so  the  blackboard  will  be 
converted  into  various  gases  and  some  ashes.  What 
has  now  become  of  it  ?  Size  and  shape,  temperature 
and  colour,  hardness  and  strength  have  all  gone.  It 
is  true  that  the  chemist  asserts  that,  if  we  could  com- 
pletely collect  the  gases  and  ashes,  one  sense-impres- 
sion at  least,  that  of  weight,  would  remain  the  same 
in  these  and  the  original  blackboard.  But  can  we 
define  sameness  to  consist  in  the  permanence  of 
some  one  sub-group  of  sense-impressions,  notwith- 
standing the  divergence  of  the  majority?  That 
permanence  may  be  a  link  in  the  succession  of  our 
sense-impressions,  but  it  can  hardly  be  taken  as  a 
basis  for  defining  individuality.  If  the  gases  and 
ashes  could  be  collected  !  They  have,  indeed,  been 
scattered  to  the  winds  and  in  course  of  time  may  be 
absorbed  by  other  vegetable  life,  ultimately,  perhaps, 
to  reappear  as  other  blackboards,  or  even  in  legs  of 
mutton.  What  has  become  of  the  "  thing-in-itself" 
behind  the  group  of  sense-impressions  we  termed  the 
original  blackboard  ?  Surely  there  is  less  permanence 
in  it  than  in  our  sense-impressions  of  the  blackboard 
—far  less  than  in  that  purely  mental  conception  of 
sameness  of  weight.  Is  it  not  clear  that  the  reality 
of  the  blackboard  consisted  for  us  in  the  permanent 
grouping  together  of  certain  sense-impressions,  and 
that  that  reality  has  disappeared  for  ever,  except  as  a 
group  of  stored  sense-impresses? 


86  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

§  15. — Individuality. 

Let  us  look  again  at  this  matter  from  a  slightly 
different  standpoint.  Let  us  consider  a  close  friend, 
and  then  suppose  his  height,  his  figure,  the  familiar 
features  of  his  face  changed  ;  let  his  entire  round  of 
physical  characteristics  be  profoundly  modified,  or 
vanish  altogether.  Next  let  us  imagine  his  gifts,  his 
prejudices,  the  little  weaknesses  which  really  endear 
him  to  us,  his  views  on  literature,  politics,  and 
social  problems,  all  his  conceptions  of  human  life 
changed  or  removed  entirely.  In  short,  all  the  sense- 
impressions  which  constitute  our  friend  gone.  Clearly 
the  friend  would  have  ceased  for  us  to  be,  his  in- 
dividuality would  have  disappeared.  The  "  reality  " 
of  the  friend  consists  for  us  not  in  some  shadowy 
"thing-in-itself,"  but  in  the  persistency  of  the  majority 
of  the  group  of  sense-impressions  by  which  we 
identify  him.  We  are  accustomed  to  speak,  for 
practical  purposes,  of  the  boy  and  the  man  as  the 
same  individual,  but  the  body  and  mind  have  changed 
so  enormously  that  the  man  would  probably  feel  the 
boy  a  perfect  stranger  if  he  were  brought  into  his 
presence.  We  experience  an  uncomfortable  sense  of 
strangeness  in  looking  at  portraits  of  ourselves  taken 
twenty  or  thirty  years  ago.  The  properties  of  youth 
and  man  are,  indeed,  so  widely  different,  that  though 
for  practical  purposes  we  call  them  the  same  person,  we 
suspect  that  they  would  cut  each  other  if  they  chanced 
to  meet  in  the  street.  Clearly  an  individual  is 
not  characterized  by  any  sameness  in  the  thing-in- 
itself,  but  by  the  permanency  in  certain  groupings  of 
sense-impressions;  this  is  the  basis  of  our  identifica- 
tion. 


THE   FACTS   OF   SCIENCE.  87 

§  ib.—The  Futility  of  "  Things-in-themselves." 

If  at  different  times  we  meet  with  two  groups  of 
sense-impressions  which  differ  very  little  from  each 
other,  we  term  them  the  same  object  or  individual,  and 
in  practical  life  the  test  of  identity  is  sameness  in  sense- 
impressions.  The  individuality  of  an  object  consists 
for  us  in  the  sameness  of  the  great  majority  of  our 
sense-impressions  at  two  instants  of  time.  In  the 
case  of  growth,  or  rapid  change  in  a  group  of  sense- 
impressions,  these  instants  must  be  taken  closer  and 
closer  together  as  the  rapidity  increases.  A  stored 
impress  of  this  sameness  is  then  formed  in  the 
mind  of  the  observer,  and  this  constitutes  in  the 
case  of  the  "  external  world "  the  recognition  of 
individuality,  in  the  case  of  the  "  internal  world " 
the  feeling  of  the  continuity  of  the  ego. 

The  considerations  of  this  section  upon  what  we 
are  to  understand  by  an  individual  thing  are  more 
important  than  they  may  appear  to  the  reader  at  first 
sight.  Are  we  forced  to  assume  a  shadowy  "  thing-in- 
itself"  behind  a  group  of  sense-impressions  in  order  to 
account  for  the  permanency  of  objects,  their  existence 
as  individuals  ?  We  have  seen  by  the  examples  cited 
that  the  thing-in-itself  would  have  to  be  supposed  as 
transient  as  the  sense-impressions,  the  permanency 
of  which  it  is  introduced  to  explain.1  We  are  not, 
however,  thrown  back  on  any  metaphysical  inquiry 
as  to  things-in-themselves,  in  order  to  define  for  prac- 
tical and  scientific  purposes  the  sameness  of  objects. 

1  Unless,  indeed,  we  follow  the  crude  materialism  of  Blichner,  who 
takes  the  special  sense-impressions  which  we  term  material  to  be  the 
basis  of  all  other  sense-impressions,  or  to  be  the  thing-in-itself.  The 
individuality  of  the  object  is  then  thrown  back  on  the  sameness  of  the 
unknown  elements  of  matter :  see  Chapter  VII, 


88  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

Looking  out  of  my  window  I  see  in  a  certain  corner 
of  my  garden  an  ash-tree,  with  boughs  of  a  certain 
form  and  shape,  the  sun  is  playing  upon  it  and  a 
certain  light  and  shade  is  visible,  the  wind  is  turning 
over  the  leaves  of  the  western  branches.  All  this 
forms  a  complex  group  of  sense-impressions.  I  close 
my  eyes,  and  on  opening  them  I  have  again  a  complex 
group  of  sense-impressions,  but  slightly  differing  from 
the  last,  for  the  sun  has  left  some  leaves  and  fallen  on 
others,  and  the  wind  is  still ;  but  there  is-  a  sameness 
in  the  great  majority  of  the  sense-impressions  of  the 
two  groups,  and  accordingly  I  term  them  one  and  the 
same  individual  tree — the  ash-tree  in  my  garden.  If 
any  one  tells  me  that  the  sameness  is  due  to  some 
"  thing-in-itself "  which  introduces  the  permanency 
into  the  group  of  sense-impressions,  I  can  as  little 
accept  or  deny  his  assertion  as  he  forsooth  can 
demonstrate  anything  about  this  shadowy  thing-in- 
itself.  He  may  call  it  Matter,  or  God,  or  Will,  or  Mind- 
stuff,  but  to  do  so  serves  no  useful  purpose,  for  it  lies 
beyond  the  field  of  conception  based  on  sense-impres- 
sions, beyond  the  sphere  of  logical  inference  or  human 
knowledge.  It  is  idle  to  postulate  shadowy  unknow- 
ables  behind  that  real  world  of  sense-impression  in 
which  we  live.  So  far  as  they  affect  us  and  our 
conduct  they  are  sense-impressions  ;  what  they  may 
be  beyond  is  fantasy,  not  fact;  if  indeed  it  be  wise  to 
assume  a  beyond,  to  postulate  that  the  surface  of  sense- 
impressions  which  shuts  us  in,  must  of  necessity  shut 
something  beyond  out.  Such  unknowables  do  not 
assist  us  in  grasping  why  groups  of  sense-impressions 
remain  more  or  less  permanently  linked  together. 
Our  experience  is  that  they  are  so  linked,  and  their 
association  is  at  the  present,  and  may  ever  remain,  as. 


THE   FACTS   OF   SCIENCE.  89 

mysterious  as  is  now  the  process  by  which  stored 
impressions  are  involuntarily  linked  together  in  the 
brain.  Why  is  the  thought  "  garden "  in  my  mind 
invariably  followed  by  the  thought  "cats"?  The 
psychical  basis  of  the  association  is  not  what  I  mean. 
I  recognize  it  in  the  repeated  experience  of  the  havoc 
which  the  feline  race  has  wrought  in  my  own  garden. 
But  what  is  the  physical  nexus  between  the  two  con- 
ceptions as  impresses  in  my  brain  ?  No  one  can  say  ; 
and  yet  this  problem  should  be  easier  to  answer 
than  that  of  the  nexus  between  the  immediate  sense- 
impressions  we  term  objects.  When  physiological 
psychology  has  answered  the  former  problem,  then  it 
will  perhaps  cease  to  be  foolish  for  us  to  discuss  the 
latter.  Meanwhile  let  us  confess  our  ignorance  and 
work  where  a  harvest  may  even  at  present  be 
gathered. 

§  17. — The    Term   Knowledge    is   Meaningless  if  applied  to 
Unthinkable  Things. 

We  are  now,  I  think,  in  a  position  to  clearly 
grasp  what  we  mean  by  the  facts  of  science  ;  we 
see  that  its  field  is  ultimately  based  upon  sensa- 
tions. The  familiar  side  of  sensations,  sense- 
impressions,  excite  the  mind  to  the  formation  of 
constructs  and  conceptions,  and  these  again,  by  asso- 
ciation and  generalization,  furnish  us  with  the  whole 
range  of  material  to  which  the  scientific  method 
applies.  Shall  we  say  that  there  are  limits  to  the 
scientific  method — that  our  power  of  knowledge  is 
imprisoned  within  the  narrow  bounds  of  sense-im- 
pression ?  The  question  is  an  absurd  one  until  it  has 
been  demonstrated  that  a  definition  can  be  found  for 
knowledge,  which  shall  include  what  does  not  lie  in 


90  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

the  plane  of  men's  thought.  Our  only  experience  of 
thought  is  associated  with  the  brain  of  man  ;  no 
inference  can  possibly  be  legitimate  which  carries 
thought  any  further  than  nervous  systems  akin  to 
his.  But  human  thought  has  its  ultimate  source 
in  sense-impressions,  beyond  which  it  cannot  reach. 
We  can  therefore  only  show  that  our  knowledge 
is  of  necessity  limited  by  demonstrating  that  there 
are  problems  within  the  sphere  of  man's  thought, 
the  only  sphere  where  thought  can  be  legitimately 
said  to  exist,  which  can  never  be  solved.  Such 
a  demonstration  I,  for  one,  have  never  met  with, 
and  I  believe  that  it  can  never  be  given.  We  must 
one  and  all  confess  that  within  the  sphere  of  thinkable 
things  our  knowledge  is  still  the  veriest  thread.  We 
may  even  go  so  far  as  to  assert  that  unto  complete 
knowledge  we  shall  never  attain  in  finite  time  ;  but 
this  admission  differs  widely  from  the  assertion  that 
knowledge  is  possible  as  to  things  outside  thought, 
but  yet,  however  possible,  must  be  unattainable.  Such 
an  assertion  must  seem  hopelessly  absurd  unless  we 
use  knowledge  as  a  term  for  some  relationship  which 
exists  between  things  outside  thought.  But  even  this 
strained  use  of  the  term,  apart  from  its  confusion, 
leads  us  no  further  than  the  statement  that  an  un- 
meaning x  exists  among  an  unthinkable  y  and  2. 

SUMMARY. 

I.  Immediate  sense-impressions  form  permanent  impresses  in  the 
brain  which  psychically  correspond  to  memory.  The  union  of  im- 
mediate sense-impressions  with  associated  stored  impresses  leads  to  the 
formation  of  "constructs,"  which  we  project  "  outside  ourselves,"  and 
term  phenomena.  The  real  world  lies  for  us  in  such  constructs  and 
not  in  shadowy  things-in-themselves.  "  Outside  "  and  "inside"  one- 
self are  alike  ultimately  based  on  sense-impressions ;  but  from  these 


THE   FACTS   OF   SCIENCE.  91 

sense-impressions  by  association,  mechanical  and  mental,  we  form 
conceptions  and  draw  inferences.  These  are  the  facts  of  science,  and 
its  field  is  essentially  the  contents  of  the  mind. 

2.  When  an  interval  elapses  between  sense-impression  and  exertion 
filled   by  cerebral   activity  marking   the   revival   and   combination  of 
stored  impresses  we  are  said  to   think   or   to  be   conscious.      Other- 
consciousness  is  an  inference,  which,  not  yet  having  been  verified  by 
immediate  sense-impression,  we  term  an  eject ;  it  is  conceivable,  how- 
ever, that  it  could  become  an  object.     Consciousness  has  no  meaning 
beyond  nervous  systems  akin  to  our  own ;  it  is  illogical  to  assert  that 
all  matter  is  conscious,  still  more  that  consciousness  can  exist  outside 
matter. 

3.  The  term  knowledge  is  meaningless  when  extended  beyond  the 
sphere  in  which  we   may  legitimately   infer   consciousness,    or   when 
applied  to  things  outside  the  plane  of  thought,  i.e.,  to  metaphysical 
terms  dignified   by   the   name   of  conceptions   although  they  do   not 
ultimately  flow  from  sense-impressions. 


LITERATURE. 

These  notices  being  only  intended  to  indicate  easily  readable  matter 

for  lay  students,  it  would  be  idle  to  provide  here  a  list  of  philosophical 

classics.     I  therefore  refer  with  some  hesitation  to  Kant's  Kritik  der 

reinen  Vernunft  (Eng.  Trans,  by  Max  Miiller).      At  the  same  time 

I    know    no    elementary    treatise   on    Kant's    view    of    "things-in- 

themselves."     As  moderate  in  length  and  easily  intelligible  I  cite: — 

BERKELEY,  G. — An  Essay  towards  a  New  Theory  of  Vision,  1709 ; 

A  Treatise  Concerning  the  Principles  of  Human  Knowledge,  1710 ; 

and  Three  Dialogues  Between  Hylas  and  Philonous,  1713.     (All 

to  be  found  in  vol.  i.  of  Wright's  edition  of  the  Works  of  G.  B., 

1843-) 
CLIFFORD,  W.  K.— Lectures  and  Essays  ("Body  and  Mind"  and  "On 

the   Nature  of  Things-in-themselves ").      Further  :    Seeing    and 

Thinking.     Macmillan's  "  Nature  "  Series,  2nd  ed.,  1880. 
HUXLEY,  T.  H. — Hume.     Macmillan,  1879. 
MACH,  E. — Beitrage  zur  Analyse  der  Empfindungen,  1886.     Further  : 

'*  The  Analysis  of  the  Sensations— Anti-metaphysical,"  The  Monist, 

vol.  i.  pp.  48-68  ;  "Sensations  and  the  Elements  of  Reality,"  Ibid. 

PP-  393-400. 
MORGAN,  C.  LL. — Animal  Life  and  Intelligence,  chaps,  viii.  and  ix. 

Arnold,  1891. 
PEARSON,  K.— The  Ethic  of  Freethought  ("  Matter  and  Soul  ")r 


CHAPTER   III. 
THE    SCIENTIFIC    LAW. 

§  I. — Resume  and  Foreword, 

THE  discussions  of  our  first  two  chapters  have  turned 
upon  the  nature  of  the  method  and  material  of 
modern  science.  The  material  of  science  corre- 
sponds, we  have  seen,  to  all  the  constructs  and 
concepts  of  the  mind.  Certain  of  these  constructs 
associated  with  immediate  sense-impressions  we  pro- 
ject outwards  and  speak  of  as  physical  facts  or 
phenomena  ;  others,  which  are  obtained  by  the  mental 
processes  of  isolation  and  co-ordination  from  stored 
sense-impresses,  we  are  accustomed  to  speak  of  as 
mental  facts.  In  the  case  of  both  these  classes  of 
facts,  the  scientific  method  is  the  sole  path  by  which 
we  can  attain  to  knowledge.  The  very  word  know- 
ledge, indeed,  only  applies  to  the  product  of  the 
scientific  method  in  this  field.  Other  methods,  here 
or  elsewhere,  may  lead  to  fantasy,  as  that  of  the  poet  or 
of  the  metaphysician,  to  belief  or  to  superstition,  but 
never  to  knowledge.  As  to  the  scientific  method,  we 
saw  in  our  first  chapter  that  it  consists  in  the  careful 
and  often  laborious  classification  I  of  facts,  in  the  com- 

1  The  reader  must  be  careful  to  recollect  that  classification  is  not 
identical  with  collection.  It  denotes  the  systematic  association  of 
kindred  facts,  the  collection,  not  of  all,  but  of  relevant  and  crucial 
facts. 


THE   SCIENTIFIC   LAW.  93 

parison  of  their  relationships  and  sequences,  and 
finally  in  the  discovery  by  aid  of  the  disciplined 
imagination  of  a  brief  statement  or  formula,  which 
in  a  few  words  resumes  the  whole  range  of  facts. 
Such  a  formula,  we  have,  seen,  is  termed  a  scientific 
law.  The  object  served  by  the  discovery  of  such 
laws  is  the  economy  of  thought  ;  the  suitable  asso- 
ciation of  conceptions  drawn  from  stored  and  corre- 
lated sense-impresses,  permits  the  fitting  exertion  to 
follow  with  the  minimum  of  thought  upon  the  receipt 
of  an  immediate  sense-impression.  The  knowledge 
of  scientific  law  enables  us  to  replace  or  supplement 
mechanical  association,  or  instinct,  by  mental  associa- 
tion, or  thought.  It  is  the  forethought^  by  aid  of 
which  man  in  a  far  higher  degree  than  other  animals 
is  able  to  make  the  fitting  exertion  on  the  receipt  of 
a  novel  group  of  sense-impressions. 

We  are  accustomed  to  speak  of  scientific  law,  or  at 
any  rate  of  one  form  of  it  termed  "natural  law,"  as  some- 
thing universally  valid  ;  we  hold  it  to  be  as  true  for  all 
men  as  for  its  original  propounder.  Nay,  there  are 
not  wanting  those  who  assert  that  natural  law  has  a 
validity  quite  independent  of  the  human  minds  which 
formulate,  demonstrate,  or  accept  it.  We  can  easily 
observe  that  there  is  really  something  sui  generis 
about  the  validity  of  natural  law.  The  philosopher, 
who  propounds  a  new  system,  or  the  prophet  who  pro- 
claims a  new  religion,  may  be  absolutely  convinced 
of  the  truth  of  his  statement ;  but  it  is  the  result 
of  experience  from  time  immemorial  that  he  cannot 
demonstrate  that  truth  so  that  conviction  is  produced 
in  the  mind  of  every  rational  being.  A  philosophic 
or  a  religious  formula — for  example,  the  idealism  of 
Berkeley,  the  scepticism  of  Hume,  or  the  self-renun- 


94  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

elation  of  the  mediaeval  mystics, — however  sure  its 
teachers  may  be  that  it  is  capable  of  rational  demon- 
stration, really  appeals  to  the  individual  tempera- 
ment, and  is  accepted  or  rejected  according  to  the 
emotional  sympathies  of  the  individual.  On  the 
other  hand  a  formula,  like  that  which  Newton  pro- 
pounded for  the  motion  of  the  planetary  system,  will 
be  accepted  by  every  rational  mind  which  has  once 
understood  its  terms  and  clearly  analyzed  the  facts 
which  it  resumes.1  This  is  sufficient  to  indicate  that 
there  must  be  some  wide  difference  between  philoso- 
phic and  scientific  systems,  between  theological  and 
scientific  formulae.  I  shall  endeavour  in  this  chapter 
to  ascertain  wherein  this  difference  lies,  to  discover 
what  is  the  meaning  of  the  word  law  when  used 
scientifically,  and  in  what  sense  we  can  say  that 
scientific  law  has  universal  validity. 

§  2. — Of  the  Word  Law  and  its  Meanings. 

The  term  law  probably  recalls  to  the  reader,  in  the 
first  place,  the  rules  of  conduct  proclaimed  by  the 
state  and  enforced  under  more  or  less  heavy  penalties 
against  certain  classes  of  its  citizens.  Austin,  the 
most  luminous  English  writer  on  jurisprudence,2  who 
has  devoted  a  very  large  portion  of  his  well-known 
work  to  a  discussion  of  the  meaning  of  the  word  !aw, 
remarks : — 

"A  law,  in  the  most  general  and  comprehensive 
acceptation  in  which  the  term,  in  its  literal  meaning, 

1  One  system  of  planetary  gravitation  is  accepted  throughout  the  civi- 
lized world,  but  more  than  a  dozen  distinct  theological  systems  and 
almost  as  many  philosophical  schools  hardly  suffice  even  for  our  own 
country. 

8  Lectures  on  Jurisprudence,  4th  ed.     London,  1879. 


±HE   SCIENTIFIC   LAW.  95 

is  employed,  may  be  said  to  be  a  rule  laid  down  for 
the  guidance  of  an  intelligent  being  by  an  intelligent 
being  having  power  over  him." 

He  further  goes  on  to  observe  that  where  there  is 
such  a  rule  there  is  a  command,  and  where  there  is  a 
command  a  corresponding  duty.  From  this  stand- 
point Austin  proceeds  to  discuss  the  various  types  of 
law,  such  as  civil,  moral,  and  divine  law.  It  will  be 
at  once  seen  that  with  Austin's  definition  of  law  there 
is  no  place  left  for  law  in  the  scientific  sense.  He 
himself  recognizes  this,  for  he  writes  : — 

"  Besides  the  various  sorts  of  rules  which  are  in- 
cluded in  the  literal  acceptation  of  the  term  law,  and 
those  which  are  by  a  close  and  striking  analogy, 
though  improperly,  termed  laws,  there  are  numerous 
applications  of  the  term  law,  which  rest  upon  a  slender 
analogy  and  are  merely  metaphorical  or  figurative. 
Such  is  the  case  when  we  talk  of  laivs  observed  by 
the  lower  animals ;  of  laws  regulating  the  growth  or 
decay  of  vegetables ;  of  lazvs  determining  the  move- 
ments of  inanimate  bodies  or  masses.  For  where 
intelligence  is  not,  or  where  it  is  too  bounded  to  take 
the  name  of  reason,  and  therefore  is  too  bounded  to 
conceive  the  purpose  of  a  law,  there  is  not  the  will 
which  law  can  work  on,  or  which  duty  can  incite  or 
restrain.  Yet  through  the  misapplications  of  a  name, 
flagrant  as  the  metaphor  is,  has  the  field  of  jurispru- 
dence and  morals  been  deluged  with  muddy  specula- 
tion "  (p.  90). 

Now  Austin  was  absolutely  in  the  right  to  empha- 
size the  immense  distinction  between  the  use  of  the 
term  law  in  science  and  its  use  in  jurisprudence. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  use  of  the  same 
name  for  two  totally  different  conceptions  has  led 


96  THE  GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

to  a  great  deal  of  confusion.  But  on  the  one 
hand,  if  the  flagrant  misapplication  of  the  scien- 
tific meaning  of  the  word  law  to  the  fields  of 
jurisprudence  and  morals  has  deluged  them  with 
"  muddy  speculation,"  there  is  equal  certainty  on  the 
other  hand  that  the  misapplication  of  the  legal  and 
moral  sense  of  the  term  has  been  equally  disadvan- 
tageous to  clear  thinking  in  the  field  of  science. 
Austin  probably  had  in  his  mind  when  he  wrote  the 
above  passage,  works  like  Hegel's  Philosophy  of  Lazu, 
in  which  we  find  the  conception  of  the  permanent  and 
absolute  character  of  scientific  law  applied  to  build  up 
a  system  of  absolute  civil  and  moral  law  which  some- 
how realizes  itself  in  human  institutions.  To  the 
mind  which  has  once  thoroughly  grasped  the  principle 
of  evolution  in  its  special  factor  of  natural  selection, 
the  civil  and  moral  laws  of  any  given  society  at  a 
particular  time  must  appear  as  ultimate  results  of  the 
struggle  for  existence  between  that  society  and  its 
neighbours.  The  civil  and  moral  codes  of  a  com- 
munity at  any  time  are  those  which  are  on  the 
average  best  adapted  to  its  current  needs,  and 
best  calculated  to  preserve  its  stability.  They  are 
very  plastic,  and  change  in  every  age  with  the 
growth  and  variation  of  social  conditions.  What 
is  lawful  is  what  is  not  prohibited  by  the  laws 
of  a  particular  society  at  a  particular  time  ;  what  is 
moral  is  what  tends  to  the  welfare  of  a  particular 
society  at  a  particular  time.  We  are  all  well  ac- 
quainted with  the  continual  change  of  civil  law ;  in 
fact  we  keep  up  an  important  body,  termed  Parlia- 
ment, whose  chief  function  it  is  to  modify  and  adapt 
our  laws,  so  that^they  shall  be  best  fitted  at  each 
period  to  assist  the  community  in  its  struggle  for 


THE  SCIENTIFIC   LAW.  97 

existence.  Of  the  changes  in  moral  law  we  are,  per- 
haps, less  conscious,  but  they  are  none  the  less  real. 
There  are  very  few  acts  which  have  not  been  moral  at 
some  period  in  the  growth  of  one  or  other  society,  and 
there  are  in  fact  many  questions  with  regard  to  which 
our  moral  judgment  is  totally  different  from  that  of 
our  grandfathers.  It  is  the  relativity,  or  variability  with 
age  and  community,  of  civil  and  moral  law,  which  led 
Austin,  I  think,  to  speak  somewhat  strongly  of  the 
speculation  which  confuses  such  law  with  law  in  the 
absolute  sense  of  science.  A  law  in  the  legal  or  moral 
sense  holds  only  for  individuals  and  individual  com- 
munities, and  is  capable  of  modification  or  repeal.  A 
law  of  science  will  be  seen  in  the  sequel  to  hold  for 
all  normal  human  beings  so  long  as  their  perceptive 
and  reasoning  faculties  remain  without  material  modi- 
fication. The  confusion  of  these  two  ideas  is  produc- 
tive of  that  "muddy  speculation"  which  finds  analogies 
between  natural  laws  and  those  of  the  spiritual  or 
moral  world. 

Now  if  we  find  that  two  quite  distinct  ideas  unfor- 
tunately bear  the  same  name  we  ought,  in  order  to 
avoid  confusion,  to  re-name  one  of  them,  or  failing  this 
we  ought  on  all  occasions  to  be  quite  sure  in  which  of 
the  two  senses  we  are  using  the  name.  Accordingly, 
in  my  first  chapter,  in  order  to  keep  clear  of  the  double 
sense  of  the  word  law,  I  endeavoured  to  replace  it, 
when  spoken  of  scientifically,  by  some  such  phrase  as 
the  "  brief  statement  or  formula  which  resumes  the 
relationship  between  a  group  of  facts."  Indeed  it 
would  be  well,  were  it  possible,  to  take  the  term 
formula,  as  already  used  by  theologians  and  mathe- 
maticians, and  use  it  in  place  of  scientific  or  natural 
law.  But  the  latter  term  has  taken  such  root  in  our 

3 


98  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

language  that  it  would  be  hard  indeed  to  replace  it 
now.  Besides,  if  the  word  law  is  to  be  used  in  one 
sense  only,  we  may  ask  why  it  is  the  scientist  rather 
than  the  jurist  who  is  to  surrender  his  right  to  the 
word  ?  The  jurists  say  that  historically  they  have  the 
older  claim  to  the  word — that  civil  law  existed  long 
anterior  to  scientific  law.  This  is  perfectly  true  in  a 
certain  sense,1  because  the  earliest  attempts  to  codify 
laws  for  the  conduct  of  men  living  in  communities 
preceded  any  conscious  recognition  of  scientific  law. 
Now  this  leads  us  directly  to  a  very  important  distinc- 
tion, which,  if  it  be  neglected,  is  the  source  of  much  con- 
fusion. Does  law  exist  before  it  receives  expression  and 
recognition  ?  According  to  Austin,  law  in  the  juridical 
sense  certainly  does  not,  for  such  a  law  involves  a 
"  command,"  and  a  "  corresponding  duty  " — that  is, 
expression  and  recognition.  What  are  we  to  say,  then, 
with  regard  to  scientific  law — does  it  really  exist  before 
man  has  given  expression  to  it  ?  Has  the  word  any 
meaning  when  unassociated  with  the  mind  of  man  ?  I 
hold  that  we  must  definitely  answer  "  no  "  to  both 
these  questions,  and  I  believe  that  the  reader  who  has 
carefully  followed  my  second  chapter  will  see  at  once 
the  grounds  for  this  statement.  A  scientific  law  is 
related  to  the  perceptions  and  conceptions  formed  by 
the  perceptive  and  reasoning  faculties  in  man  ;  it  is 
meaningless  except  in  association  with  these ;  it  is 
the  resume  or  brief  expression  of  the  relationships  and 
sequences  of  certain  groups  of  these  perceptions  and 
conceptions,  and  exists  only  when  formulated  by 
man. 

1  For  our  final  conclusions  as  to  the  historical  right  to  the  word, 
see  p.   114. 


THE   SCIENTIFIC   LAW.  99 

§  3. — Natural  Law  relative  to  Man. 

Let  us  take  that  branch  of  scientific  law  which 
deals  with  the  so-called  "outside  world" — natural  law. 
We  have  seen  that  this  outside  world  is  a  construct. 
It  consists  of  objects  constructed  partly  from  imme- 
diate sense-impressions,  and  partly  from  stored  im- 
presses. For  this  reason  the  "  outside  world "  is 
essentially  conditioned  by  the  perceptive  and  reten- 
tive faculties  in  man.  Even  the  metaphysicians,  who 
postulate  "  things-in-themselves,"  admit  that  sense- 
impressions  in  nowise  resemble  them,  and  that  man's 
sense-impressions  so  far  from  being  the  entire  pro- 
duct of  "things-in-themselves,"  are  probably  but  the 
smallest  portion  of  their  "  capacity  for  producing " 
sense -impression.  Hence  to  talk  about  natural  law 
as  existing  in  "things-in-themselves"  and  apart 
from  man's  mind  is  again  to  assert  an  unmeaning 
x  among  an  unthinkable  y  and  z  (p.  90).  If  nature 
for  man  is  conditioned  by  his  perceptive  and  re- 
tentive faculties,  then  natural  law  is  conditioned 
by  them  also.  It  has  no  relation  to  something 
above  and  beyond  man,  but  solely  to  the  special  pro- 
ducts of  his  perceptive  faculty.  We  have  no  right 
to  infer  its  existence  for  things  without  a  perceptive 
faculty,  or  even  for  perceptive  faculties  not  closely 
akin  to  man's.  I  believe  that  a  great  deal  of  the  ob- 
scurity involved  in  popular  ideas  about  "  Nature " 
would  have  been  avoided  had  this  been  borne  in 
mind. 

A  good  instance  of  the  relativity  of  natural  law 
is  to  be  found  in  the  so-called  Second  Law  of  Thermo- 
dynamics. This  law  resumes  a  wide  range  of  human 
experience,  that  is,  of  sequences  observed  in  our  sense- 
impressions,  and  embraces  a  great  number  of  conclu- 


IOO  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

sions  not  only  bearing  on  practical  life,  but  upon  that 
dissipation  of  energy  which  is  even  supposed  to  fore- 
shadow the  end  of  all  life.  The  appreciation  of  the 
relativity  of  natural  law  is  so  important  that  the 
reader  will,  I  trust,  pardon  me  for  citing  the  entire 
passage  in  which  Clerk-Maxwell  discusses  this 
instance  * : — 

"  One  of  the  best-established  facts  in  thermo-dyna- 
mics  is  that  it  is  impossible  in  a  system  enclosed  in  an 
envelope  which  permits  neither  change  of  volume  nor 
passage  of  heat,  and  in  which  both  the  temperature 
and  pressure  are  everywhere  the  same,  to  produce 
any  inequality  of  temperature  or  of  pressure  without 
the  expenditure  of  work.  This  is  the  second  law  of 
thermo-dynamics,  and  it  is  undoubtedly  true  so  long 
as  we  can  deal  with  bodies  only  in  mass,  and  have  no 
power  of  perceiving  or  handling  the  separate  mole- 
cules of  which  they  are  made  up.  But  if  we  conceive 
a  being  whose  faculties  are  so  sharpened  that  he  can 
follow  every  molecule  in  its  course,  such  a  being, 
whose  attributes  are  still  as  essentially  finite  as  our 
own,  would  be  able  to  do  what  is  at  present  impos- 
sible to  us.  For  we  have  seen  that  the  molecules  in  a 
vessel  of  air  at  uniform  temperature  are  moving  with 
velocities  by  no  means  uniform,  though  the  mean 
velocity  of  any  great  number  of  them,  arbitrarily 
selected,  is  almost  exactly  uniform.  Now  let  us  sup- 
pose that  such  a  vessel  is  divided  into  two  portions,  A 
and  B,  by  a  division  in  which  there  is  a  small  hole, 
and  that  a  being,2  who  can  see  the  individual  mole- 

1  Theory  of  Heat,  3rd  ed.  p.  308.     Longmans,  1872. 

2  This  "being"  has  become  known  to  fame  as  "Clerk-Maxwell's 
demon,"  but  it  must  be  noted  that  Clerk-Maxwell  supposes  the  being's 
attributes  "  essentially  finite  as  our  own  " — a  peculiarity  not  usually 
associated  with  demons. 


THE  SCIENTIFIC   LAW.  10 1 

cules,  opens  and  closes  this  hole,  so  as  to  allow  only 
the  swifter  molecules  to  pass  from  A  to  B,  and  only 
the  slower  ones  to  pass  from  B  to  A.  He  will  thus, 
without  expenditure  of  work,  raise  the  temperature  of 
B  and  lower  that  of  A,  in  contradiction  to  the  second 
law  of  thermo-dynamics." 

To  render  this  passage  clear  to  the  lay  reader,  we 
have  only  to  add  that  in  this  kinetic  theory  the  tem- 
perature of  a  gas  depends  upon  the  mean  speed  of  its 
molecules.  Now  the  second  law  of  thermo-dynamics 
resumes  with  undoubted  correctness  a  wide  range  of 
human  experience,  and  is,  to  that  extent,  as  much  a 
law  of  nature  as  that  of  gravitation.  But  the  kinetic 
theory  of  gases,  whether  it  be  hypothetical  or  not,, 
enables  us  to  conceive  a  demon  having  a  percep- 
tive faculty  differing  rather  in  degree  than  quality 
from  our  own,  for  whom  the  second  law  of  thermo- 
dynamics would  not  necessarily  be  a  law  of  nature. 
Such  a  conception  enables  us  to  grasp  how  relative 
what  we  term  nature  is  to  the  faculty  which  per- 
ceives it.  Scientific  law  does  not,  any  more  than 
sense-impression,  lie  in  a  universe  outside  and 
unconditioned  by  ourselves.  Clerk-Maxwell's  demon 
would  perceive  nature  as  something  totally  different 
from  our  nature,  and  to  a  less  extent  this  is  in 
great  probability  true  for  the  animal  world,  and  even 
for  man  in  different  stages  of  growth  and  civilization. 
The  worlds  of  the  child  and  of  the  savage  differ 
widely  from  that  of  normal  civilized  man.  One  half 
of  the  perceptions  which  the  latter  links  together  in 
a  law  of  nature  may  be  wanting  to  the  former.  Our 
law  of  the  tides  could  have  no  meaning  for  a  blind 
worm  on  the  shore,  for  whom  the  moon  had  no  exis- 

1  This  point  is  well  brought  out  by  Prof.  Lloyd  Morgan  in  his  Animal 


102  THE  GRAMMAR   OF 

tence.1  By  the  contents  and  the  manner  of  perception 
the  law  of  nature  is  essentially  conditioned  for  each 
perceptive  faculty.  To  speak,  therefore,  of  the  uni- 
versal validity  of  a  law  of  nature  has  only  meaning 
in  so  far  as  we  refer  to  a  certain  type  of  perceptive 
faculty,  namely,  that  of  a  normal  human  being. 

§  4.-—  Man  as  the  Maker  of  Natural  Law. 
The  other  problem  with  which  we  are  concerned  is 
the  existence  or  non-existence  of  a  scientific  law 
before  it  has  been  postulated.  Here  the  reader  will 
feel  inclined  to  remark:  "Admitted  that  'Nature'  is 
conditioned  by  man's  perceptive  faculty,  surely  the 
sequences  of  man's  perceptions  follow  the  same  law 
whether  man  has  formulated  that  law  in  words  or 
not?  The  law  of  gravitation  ruled  the  motion  of 
the  planets  ages  before  Newton  was  born."  Yes  and 
no,  reader;  the  answer  must  depend  on  how  we  define 
our  terms.  The  sequences  involved  in  man's  per- 
ception of  the  motion  of  the  heavenly  bodies  were 
doubtless  much  the  same  to  Ptolemy  and  Newton ; 
to  primitive  man  and  to  ourselves  the  motion  of  the 
sun  is  a  common  perception,  but  a  sequence  of  sense- 
impressions  is  not  in  itself  a  law.  That  planets 

Life  and  Intelligence.  After  pointing  out  the  widvly  different  character 
of  the  sense  organs  in  man  and  insects  he  continues  : — 

"Remember  their  compound  eyes  with  mosaic  vision,  coarser  by  far 
than  our  retinal  vision,  and  their  ocelli  of  problematical  value,  and  the 
complete  absence  of  muscular  adjustments  in  either  one  or  the  other. 
Can  we  conceive  that,  with  organs  so  different,  anything  like  a  similar 
perceptual  world  can  be  elaborated  in  their  insect  mind  ?  I  for  one 
cannot.  Admitting  therefore  that  their  perceptions  may  be  fairly  sur- 
mised to  be  analogous,  that  their  world  is  the  result  of  construction,  I 
do  not  see  how  we  can  for  one  moment  suppose  that  the  perceptual 
world  they  construct  can  in  any  accurate  sense  be  said  to  resemble  ours  " 
(pp.  298-9,  356-7,  361). 


THE   SCIENTIFIC   LAW.  IO3 

move,  that  a  chick  takes  its  origin  from  the  egg,  may 
be  sequences  of  sense-impressions,  they  may  be  facts 
to  be  dealt  with  scientifically,  but  they  are  not  laws 
in  themselves,  at  least  not  in  any  useful  interpretation 
of  the  word.  The  changes  of  the  whole  planetary 
system  might  be  perceived,  and  even  those  percep- 
tions translated  into  words  with  a  fulness  surpassing 
that  of  our  most  accurate  modern  observer,  and  yet 
neither  the  sequence  of  perceptions  in  itself  nor  the 
description  involve  the  existence  of  any  law.  The 
sequence  of  perceptions  has  to  be  compared  with 
other  sequences,  classification  and  generalization  have 
to  follow ;  conceptions  and  ideas,  pure  products  of  the 
mind, must  be  formed,  before  a  description  can  be  given 
of  a  range  of  sequences  which,  by  its  conciseness  and 
comprehensiveness,  is  worthy  of  the  name  of  scientific 
law. 

Let  it  be  noted  that  in  this  it  is  not  only  the 
process  of  reaching  scientific  law  which  is  mental,  but 
that  the  law  itself  when  reached  involves  an  associa- 
tion of  natural  facts  or  phenomena  with  mental 
conceptions,  lying  quite  outside  the  particular  field 
of  those  phenomena.  Without  the  mental  concep- 
tions the  law  could  not  be,  and  it  only  comes  into 
existence  when  these  mental  conceptions  are  first 
associated  with  the  phenomena.  The  law  of  gravita- 
tion is  not  so  much  the  discovery  by  Newton  of  a 
rule  guiding  the  motion  of  the  planets  as  his  invention 
of  a  method  of  briefly  describing  the  sequences  of  sense- 
impressions,  which  we  term  planetary  motion.  He  did 
this  in  terms  of  a  purely  mental  conception,  namely, 
mutual  acceleration.1  Newton  first  brought  the  idea 

1  The  reader  will  find  mutual  acceleration  fully  defined  and  discussed 
in  Chapter  VIII. 


104  THE  GRAMMAR   OF  SCIENCE. 

of  mutual  acceleration  of  a  certain  type  into  associa- 
tion with  a  certain  range  of  phenomena,  and  was  thus 
enabled  to  state  a  formula,  which,  by  what  we  may 
term  mental  shorthand,  resumes  a  vast  number  of 
observed  sequences.  The  statement  of  this  formula 
was  not  so  much  the  discovery  as  the  creation  of  the 
law  of  gravitation.  A  natural  law  is  thus  seen  to  be 
a  re'sumt  in  mental  shorthand,  which  replaces  for  us 
a  lengthy  description  of  the  sequences  among  our 
sense-impressions.  Law  in  the  scientific  sense  is 
thus  essentially  a  product  of  the  human  mind  and 
has  no  meaning  apart  from  man.  It  owes  its  existence 
to  the  creative  power  of  his  intellect.  There  is  more 
meaning  in  the  statement  that  man  gives  laws  to 
Nature  than  in  its  converse  that  Nature  gives  laws  to 
man. 

§  $.—The  Two  Senses  of  the  Words  "  Natural  Law." 

We  have  now  traced  at  least  one  point  of  analogy 
between  juridical  and  scientific  law  which  I  think 
escaped  Austin,  namely,  both  are  the  product  of 
human  intelligence.  But  we  have  at  the  same  time 
seen  the  wide  distinction  between  the  two.  The 
civil  law  involves  a  command  and  a  duty  ;  the 
scientific  law  is  a  description,  not  a  prescription. 
The  civil  law  is  valid  only  for  a  special  community 
at  a  special  time  ;  the  scientific  law  is  valid  for  all 
normal  human  beings,  and  is  unchangeable  so  long 
as  their  perceptive  faculties  remain  at  their  present 
stage  of  development.1  For  Austin,  however,  and 

1  The  perceptive  faculty  is  probably,  even  on  the  average,  varying 
slightly,  however  insensibly.  Still,  the  perceptive  faculty  is  now 
among  men  permanent  in  type,  as  compared  with  the  changes  it  must 
have  undergone  during  man's  evolution  from  a  lowly  form  of  life. 


THE  SCIENTIFIC  LAW.  105 

for  many  other  philosophers  too,  the  law  of  nature 
was  not  the  mental  formula,  but  the  repeated 
sequence  of  perceptions.  This  repeated  sequence 
of  perceptions  they  projected  out  of  themselves,  and 
considered  as  part  of  an  external  world  uncon- 
ditioned by  and  independent  of  man.  In  this  sense 
of  the  word,  a  sense  unfortunately  far  too  common 
to-day,  natural  law  could  exist  before  it  was  recog- 
nized by  man.  In  this  sense  natural  law  has  a  much 
older  ancestry  than  civil  law,  of  which  it  appears  to 
be  the  parent.  For  tracing  historically  the  growth 
of  civil  law,  we  find  its  origin  in  unwritten  custom. 
The  customs  which  the  struggle  for  existence  have 
gradually  developed  in  a  tribe  become  in  course  of 
time  its  earliest  laws.  Now,  the  farther  we  go  back 
in  the  development  of  man,  through  more  and  more 
complete  barbarism  to  a  simply  animal  condition,  the 
more  nearly  we  find  customs  merging  in  instinctive 
habits.  But  the  instinctive  habit  of  a  gregarious 
animal  is  very  much  akin  to  what  Austin  would  have 
termed  a  natural  law.  The  laws  relating  to  property 
and  marriage  in  the  civilized  states  of  to-day  can  be 
traced  back  with  more  or  less  continuity  to  the 
instinctive  habits  of  gregarious  animals.  The  his- 
torical origin,  therefore,  of  civil  law  is  to  be  sought 
in  natural  law  in  its  older  sense.  Indeed  this  fact 
was  recognized  by  the  early  Roman  jurists,  who  refer 
to  a  lex  natures  as  existing  alongside  the  civil  law. 
This  law  of  nature  they  considered  animals  as  well  as 
men  to  have  a  knowledge  of,  and  they  made  special 
reference  to  it  in  relation  to  marriage  and  the  birth 
of  children.  Now  it  is  clear  that,  however  flagrant  in 
Austin's  opinion  the  metaphor  may  be  when  we 
speak  of  the  laws  observed  by  animals,  still  the  use  of 


106  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

the  word  law  in  this  sense  is  a  very  old  one  even 
among  jurists  themselves. 

§  6. — Confusion  between  the  two  Senses  of  Natural  Law. 

But  the  Roman  lawyers  merely  took  the  idea  of 
natural  law  from  the  Greek  philosophers,  and  it  is 
specially  to  the  Stoics  that  we  owe  a  conception  of 
law  which  is  of  value  as  illustrating  the  kind  of 
obscurity  which  still  attaches  to  the  word  natural  law 
in  many  minds.  The  Stoics  defined  nature  as  the 
universe  of  things,  and  they  declared  this  universe  to 
be  guided  by  reason.  But  reason,  because  it  is  a 
directive  power,  forbidding  and  enjoining,  they  called 
law.  Now,  the  law  of  nature  they  considered  to  take 
in  some  manner  its  rise  in  nature  itself — there  was  no 
source  of  law  to  nature  outside  nature — and  they 
accordingly  defined  this  law  of  nature  as  a  force 
inherent  in  the  universe.  They  further  asserted  that 
since  reason  cannot  be  twofold,  and  since  man  has 
reason  as  well  as  the  universe,  the  reason  in  man  and 
the  universe  must  be  the  same,  and  therefore  the  law 
of  nature  must  be  the  law  by  which  men's  actions 
ought  to  be  guided. 

The  string  of  dogma  and  unwarranted  inference 
marking  this  argument — which,  however,  has  only 
reached  us  at  second-hand1 — is  characteristic  enough. 
Yet  the  argument  is  noteworthy,  for  we  find  in  it  the 
three  meanings  of  the  term  law  with  which  we  have 
been  dealing  hopelessly  confused.  The  Stoics  pass 
from  the  scientific  law  to  the  lex  natures, — the  mere 
sequence  of  phenomena, — and  then  to  the  civil  or 
moral  law  without  in  the  least  observing  the  magni- 

1  Marcus  Aurelius,  iv.  4,  and  Cicero,   De  legibus  i.  6-7.     Cf.  T.  C. 
Sandars,  The  Institutes  of  Justinian,  p.  xxii.     Longmans,  1878. 


SCIENTIFIC   LAW.  10? 

tude  of  their  spring;  and  what  these  early  philosophers 
accomplished  in  this  way  has  been  surpassed  by  the 
devotees  of  philosophy  and  natural  theology  in  later 
ages.  One  example  will,  perhaps,  suffice  for  our 
present  investigation.  Richard  Hooker,  a  divine  of 
the  sixteenth  century,  who  achieved  a  remarkable 
reputation  for  himself  by  stating  paradoxes  based  on 
a  confusion  between  natural  and  moral  law,  thus 
defines  law  in  general : — 

"  That  which  doth  assign  unto  each  thing  the  kind, 
that  which  doth  moderate  the  force  and  power,  that 
which  doth  appoint  the  form  and  measure  of  working, 
the  same  we  term  a  Law "  (Ecclesiastical  Polity ', 
bk.  I.  ii.). 

Hooker  further  considers  that  all  things,  including 
nature,  have  some  operations  "  not  violent  or  casual." 
This  leads  him  to  assert  that  such  operations  have 
"some  fore-conceived  end."  Hence  he  holds  that 
nature  is  guided  by  law,  and  that  this  law  is  a  pro- 
duct of  reason.  Unlike  the  Stoics,  Hooker  placed 
this  reason  in  a  worker,  God,  outside  and  not  inherent 
in  Nature,  otherwise  his  doctrine  and  the  conclusions 
he  draws  from  it  closely  resemble  theirs.  He  was, 
however,  aware  of  the  elastic  character  of  his  defini- 
tion of  law,  for  he  writes  : — 

"  They,  who  thus  are  accustomed  to  speak,  apply  the 
name  Law  unto  that  only  rule  of  working  which  a 
superior  authority  imposeth  ;  whereas  we,  somewhat 
more  enlarging  the  sense  thereof,  term  any  kind  of 
rule  or  canon  whereby  actions  are  framed,  a  law  " 
(bk.  I.  iii.). 

The  views  of  Hooker  and  the  Stoics  thus  briefly 
sketched  deserve  careful  consideration  by  the  reader, 
as  they  suggest  the  type  of  fallacy  into  which  we  fall 


IOS  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

by  ill-defined  use  of  the  term  natural  law.1  In  the 
first  place  these  philosophers  start  from  the  concep- 
tion of  natural  law  as  the  mere  concatenation  of 
phenomena,  the  succession  or  routine  of  sense-impres- 
sions. In  the  next  place  as  materialists  they  project 
these  sense-impressions  into  a  real  outside  world, 
unconditioned  by  and  independent  of  man's  percep- 
tive faculty.  Then  they  infer  reason  behind  the 
concatenation  of  phenomena.  Now,  reason  is  known 
to  us  only  in  association  with  consciousness,  and  we 
find  consciousness  only  with  the  accompaniment  of 
a  certain  type  of  nervous  organism.  Thus  to  infer 
reason  in  what  has  been  previously  postulated  as 
outside  and  independent  of  this  type  of  nervous 
organism  is  unjustifiable  ;  it  may  be  dogma,  but  it  is 
not  logic.  It  makes  little  difference  whether,  with 
the  Stoic,  we  assert  that  reason  is  inherent  in  nature, 
or,  like  Hooker,  place  the  lawgiver  outside  nature  as 
at  once  its  creator  and  director.  Both  assertions  lie 
completely  outside  the  field  of  knowledge,  and,  as  we 
have  said  of  the  like  statements  before,  they  logically 
refer  to  an  unmeaning  x  existing  among  an  unthink- 
able y  and  z  (i.e.,  "  realities  "  unconditioned  by  man's 
perceptive  faculty). 

1  The  study  of  fallacy  in  concrete  examples  ought  to  play  a  greater 
part  in  our  educational  curriculum.  Certain  works  have  a  permanent 
value  in  this  respect.  I  can  conceive  no  better  exercises  for  a  student 
of  logic  or  jurisprudence  than  an  analysis  of  the  paralogisms  in  Book  I 
of  Hooker's  Ecclesiastical  Polity ;  for  a  student  of  physics,  than  a  dis- 
covery of  the  fallacies  in  Mr.  Grant  Allen's  Force  and  Energy  ;  or  for 
both  than  a  critical  study  of  Drummond's  A^/wra/Zaw  in  the  Spiritual 
World ;  while  a  more  difficult  study  in  pseudo-science  will  be  found  in 
the  first  part  of  J.  G.  Vogt's  Das  Wesen  der  Elektrizitdt  und  des 
Magnetismus.  The  power  of  criticism  and  the  logical  insight  thus 
attainable  are  in  many  respects  as  advantageous  as  the  appreciation 
of  method  which  results  from  the  perusal  of  genuine  science.  , 


THE  SCIENTIFIC  LAW.  1 09 

§  7. —  The  Reason  behind  Nature. 

But  how,  it  may  be  asked,  has  the  conception  that 
reason  exists  behind  phenomena  become  so  wide- 
spead  ?  Why  have  so  many  philosophers  and  theolo- 
gians, nay,  even  scientists,1  used  the  "argument  from 
design"?  The  duty  of  science  does  not  end  with 
showing  an  argument  to  be  fallacious  ;  it  has  to 
investigate  the  origin  of  the  fallacy  and  show  the 
nature  of  the  process  by  which  it  has  arisen.  In  the 
present  case  I  do  not  think  we  have  far  to  seek. 
Briefly  stated,  the  "  argument  from  design  "  consists 
in  the  production  of  evidence  from  the  laws  of  nature, 
tending  to  exhibit  those  laws  as  the  product  of  a 
rational  being  or  of  reason  in  one  or  another  form. 
Now,  although  in  the  law  of  nature  defined  as  a  mere 
concatenation  of  phenomena,  as  a  sequence  of  sense- 
impressions,  there  is,  so  far  as  I  can  perceive,  no 
evidence  of  reason  in  any  intelligible  sense  of  the 
word,  yet  in  the  law  of  science,  and  in  that  branch  of 
it  which  in  this  work  we  have  termed  natural  law, 
there  is  every  evidence  of  reason.  So  soon  as  man 
begins  to  form  conceptions  from  his  sense-impres- 
sions, to  combine,  to  isolate,  and  to  generalize, 
then  he  begins  to  project  his  own  reason  into 
phenomena,  to  replace  in  his  mind  the  sense- 
impresses  of  past  concatenations  of  phenomena 
by  those  brief  resumes  or  formulae  which  describe 
the  sequences  of  sense-impressions  in  mental  short- 
hand. He  begins  to  confuse  the  scientific  law,  the 
product  of  his  own  reason,  with  the  mere  con- 
catenation of  phenomena,  the  natural  law  in  the 
sense  of  Hooker  and  the  Stoics.  As  he  projects  his 

1  E.g.,  Sir  G.  G.  Stokes,  in  his  otherwise  most  suggestive  and  masterly 
Burnett  Lectures  on  Light. 


IIO  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

sense-impressions  outside  himself,  and  forgets  that 
they  are  essentially  conditioned  by  his  own  perceptive 
faculty,  so  he  unconsciously  severs  himself  from  the 
products  of  his  own  reason,  projects  them  into 
phenomena,  only  to  refind  them  again  and  wonder 
what  reason  put  them  there.  Here,  in  the  double 
sense  of  the  word  natural  law,  lies  the  origin  of  much 
obscure  speculation. 

The  reason  we  find  in  natural  phenomena  is  surely 
put  there  by  the  only  reason  of  which  we  have  any 
experience,  namely,  the  human  reason.  The  mind  of 
man  in  the  process  of  classifying  phenomena  and 
formulating  natural  law  introduces  the  element  of 
reason  into  nature,  and  the  logic  man  finds  in  the 
universe  is  but  the  reflection  of  his  own  reasoning 
faculty.  A  dog,  if  able  to  recognize  the  instinct 
which  guides  his  actions,  might  very  naturally  sup- 
pose instinct  and  not  reason  to  be  the  basis  of  natural 
phenomena,  reflecting  his  own  source  of  action  into 
all  he  observed  around  him.  Indeed,  it  seems  to  me 
more  logical  to  find  instinct  than  reason  behind  the 
setting  and  rising  of  the  sun,  for  instinct  at  least  does 
not  presuppose  consciousness.  Perhaps  if  our  dog 
were  a  Stoic  dog  the  instinct  would  seem  to  him 
inherent  in  the  universe  itself,  while  had  he  been 
reared  at  the  parsonage  he  would  certainly  fancy  his 
kennel  the  product  of  an  instinct  extramundane.  But 
both  dog  and  man,  in  thus  arguing  beyond  the  sphere 
of  legitimate  inference,  are  also  breaking  a  funda- 
mental canon  of  the  scientific  method.  This  canon 
is  practically  due  to  Newton,  and  forbids  us  to  seek 
superfluous  causes  for  natural  phenomena.1  We  ought 

1  Causas  rerum  naturafaim  non  plures  admittidebere,  quam  qua  &vera 
sint  &°  earwn  Phanomenis  explicandis  sufficiunt.  Natura  enim  simplex 


THE   SCIENTIFIC   LAW.  Ill 

not  to  look  for  new  causes  to  explain  any  group  of 
phenomena  until  we  have  shown  that  no  known  cause 
is  capable  of  explaining  it.  In  our  next  chapter  we 
shall  see  more  clearly  what  is  to  be  understood  by  the 
words  "  cause  "  and  "  explanation,"  but  for  the  present 
Newton's  canon  suffices  to  show  us  that  the  Stoics 
were  unscientific  in  seeking  for  unknown  or  unknow- 
able "reasons"  inherent  in  nature,  until  they  had 
demonstrated  that  the  only  rational  faculty  known  to 
them — namely,  that  of  man — was  insufficient  to 
account  for  the  rational  element  they  professed  to 
observe  in  nature.  What  is  reason  ?  Where  may  we 
infer  its  existence  ?  Can  we  proceed  from  this  admis- 
sible reason  to  the  rational  element  in  natural  law  ? 
— these  are  the  questions  the  Stoics  ought  logically 
to  have  asked  themselves.  Our  wonder  ought  not  to 
be  excited  by  the  idea  that  so  vast  a  range  of  phe- 
nomena are  ruled  (sic  /)  by  so  simple  a  law  as  that  of 
gravitation,  but  we  ought  to  express  our  astonishment 
that  the  human  mind  is  able  to  express  by  so  brief  a 
description  such  wide  sequences  of  sense-impressions. 
This  capacity  of  itself  suggests  some  harmony,  some 
relation  between  the  perceptive  and  reasoning  faculties 
in  man — a  matter  to  which  I  shall  return  later. 

§  8. — True  Relation  of  Civil  and  Natural  Law. 

Proceeding  from  Austin's  definition  of  law,  we 
have  found  it  necessary  to  distinguish  between  two 
different  ideas  frequently  confused  under  the  term 
"natural  law,"  namely,  the  mere  concatenation  of 

est  <5r°  rerum  causis stiperjlttis  non  luxuriat.  Principia.  (Editio  Princeps, 
1687,  p.  402.)  This  "simplicity  of  nature"  is,  of  course,  a  dogma, 
but  the  regula  philosophandi  which  forbids  us  to  revel  in  superfluous 
causes  is  fundamental  to  our  view  of  science  as  an  economy  of  thought. 


112  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

phenomena  and  the  mental  formula  which  gives  brief 
expression  to  their  sequences.  Before  we  devote  our 
undivided  attention  to  the  latter  as  the  scientific  con- 
ception of  natural  law,  it  may  be  of  interest  to  clear 
up  one  or  two  remaining  points  with  regard  to  civil 
and  scientific  law.  While  Austin,  thinking  rather  of 
natural  law  in  the  old  sense,  states  that  any  relation 
between  the  two  is  merely  metaphorical,  both  the 
Stoics  and  Hooker  conceive  that  the  reason,  or  the 
lawgiver  to  be  recognized  behind  phenomena,  ought 
to  guide  man's  moral  conduct.  Now,  if  these  philo- 
sophers were  looking  upon  natural  law  as  the  product 
of  the  human  reason  there  would  be  little  to  require 
further  comment;  but,  as  we  have  seen,  this  is  far  from 
the  case.  The  Stoics  tell  us  that  reason  cannot  be 
twofold,  that  it  must  be  the  same  reason  in  both 
man  and  the  universe,  and  that  therefore  the  civil  law 
of  man  is  identical  with  natural  law.1  The  inference 
is  of  course  unjustifiable,  for  the  same  reason  may  be 
at  work  in  two  quite  distinct  fields.  It  is  important 
to  notice,  however,  that  in  one  sense  civil  and  moral 
laws  are  natural  products;  they  are  products  of  par- 
ticular phases  of  human  growth.  This  growth  is 
itself  capable  of  treatment  by  the  scientific  method, 
and  the  sequence  of  its  stages  can  be  expressed 
by  scientific  formulae,  or, — looking  at  civil  and 
moral  law  as  objective  phenomena, — by  natural 
laws.  Thus  civil  law  is  a  natural  product,  and 
not  identical  with  natural  law — any  more  than  the 
particular  configuration  of  the  planetary  system 

1  Up  to  the  "  sameness  of  the  reason  "  there  is  little  exception  to  be 
taken  to  the  argument,  but  few  of  us  would  agree  with  the  dictum  of 
that  ancient  and  upright  judge,  Sir  John  Powell,  that  "nothing  is  law 
that  is  not  reason." 


THE   SCIENTIFIC   LAW.  113 

at  this  moment  is  identical  with  the  law  of 
gravitation.  We  are  now,  I  think,  in  a  position  to 
draw  a  clear  distinction  between  civil  (or  moral)  law 
and  natural  law.  Civil  law  takes  its  origin  in  natural 
Jaw  in  the  old  sense  (p.  105),  while  its  growth  and 
variation  can,  in  broad  outline  at  least,  be  described 
in  the  brief  formulae  of  science,  or  in  natural  laws  in 
the  scientific  sense.  Civil  and  moral  laws  are  the 
natural  product  of  societies,  and  of  classes  within 
society,  struggling  in  the  early  days  for  self-preserva- 
tion, and  in  these  later  days  for  a  maximum  of  indi- 
vidual comfort. 

A  civil  law,  according  to  Austin,  is  a  rule  laid  down 
for  the  guidance  of  an  intelligent  being  by  an  intelli- 
gent being  having  power  over  him.  Such  a  rule 
varies  with  every  age  and  every  society.  On  the 
other  hand,  a  natural  law  is  not  laid  down  by  one 
intelligent  being  for  another  ;  it  involves  no  command 
or  corresponding  duty,  and  it  is  valid  for  all  normal 
human  beings.  It  has  taken  centuries  for  men  to 
arrive  at  a  full  appreciation  of  this  distinction,  and  it 
would  be  well  could  the  distinction  be  now  em- 
phasized by  the  specialization  of  the  word  law  in  one 
or  other  of  its  senses.  We  sadly  need  separate  terms 
for  the  routine  of  sense-impressions,  for  the  brief 
description  or  formula  of  science  and  for  the  canon 
of  social  conduct,  or,  in  other  words,  for  the  percep- 
tive order,  the  descriptive  order,  and  the  prescriptive 
order.  Historically  we  cannot  say  that  any  of  these 
orders  has  the  higher  claim  to  the  title  law,  for  the 
Roman  ideas  of  law  must  at  least  be  traced  back  to 
their  Greek  parentage.  Here,  in  the  Greek  word  1/6/^09, 
law,  the  confusion  centres,  and  at  the  same  time  the 
historical  origin  of  the  confusion  becomes  apparent 

9 


114  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

This  word  shows  us  that  civil  law  originated  in  custom, 
and  yet  Plato  derives  it  from  "distribution  of  mind."1 
Anything  from  the  harmony  of  nature  to  the  strains 
of  a  song  was  for  the  Greek  law.  In  the  conception 
of  order  or  sequence,  therefore,  we  see  the  historical 
origin  of  law  in  all  its  senses,  and  thus  no  claim  to 
priority  on  the  part  of  either  jurist  or  scientist  can  be 
historically  proven.  No  individual  writer  can  hope 
with  success  to  remould  such  old-established  usage  as 
is  associated  with  the  word  law,  and  all  he  can  strive 
to  do  is  to  keep  clearly  distinct  in  the  mind  of  his 
readers  the  sense  in  which  the  word  on  each  occasion 
is  used.2 

§  9. — Physical  and  Metaphysical  Supersenstiousness. 

Having  now  analyzed  our  ideas  of  law,  and  reached 
a  definition  of  law  in  its  scientific  sense,  it  may  be 
well,  even  at  the  cost  of  repetition,  to  discuss  at 
greater  length  our  conclusions  and  their  application 
to  our  theory  of  life.  From  the  material  provided  by 
the  senses,  either  directly  or  in  the  form  of  stored 
sense-impresses,  we  draw  conceptions.  About  these 
conceptions  we  reason,  endeavouring  to  ascertain 
their  relationships  and  to  express  their  sequences  in 
those  brief  statements  or  formulae  which  we  have 
termed  scientific  laws.  In  this  process  we  often 
analyze  the  material  of  sense-impressions  into 
elements  which  are  not  in  themselves  capable  of  form- 

*  The  Laws,  iv.  714,  and  see  also  iii.  700,  and  vii.  800. 

a  For  the  remainder  of  this  work  I  shall,  for  convenience,  however 
speak  of  natural  law  in  the  old  sense,  or,  as  a  mere  routine  of  per- 
ceptions, as  law  in  the  nomic  sense.  Law  in  the  nomic  sense  is  thus  no 
product  of  the  reason,  but  a  pure  order  of  perceptions,  while  Bram- 
hall's  coinage  anomy  may  be  conveniently  used  for  a  breach  in  the 
routine  of  perceptions. 


THE   SCIENTIFIC   LAW.  1 15 

ing  distinct  sense-impressions  ;  we  reach  conceptions 
which  are  not  capable  of  direct  verification  by  the 
senses  ;  that  is  to  say,  we  can  never,  or  at  least  we 
cannot  at  present,  assert  that  these  elements  have 
objective  reality  (see  our  p.  50).  Thus  physicists  reduce 
the  groups  of  sense-impressions  which  we  term  ma- 
terial substances  to  the  elements  molecule  and  atomy 
and  discuss  the  motion  of  these  elements,  which  have 
never  been,  and  perhaps  never  can  become,  direct 
sense-impressions.  No  physicist  ever  saw  or  felt  an 
individual  atom.  Atom  and  molecule  are  intellectual 
conceptions  by  aid  of  which  physicists  classify  phe- 
nomena, and  formulate  the  relationships  between 
their  sequences.  From  a  certain  standpoint,  therefore, 
these  conceptions  of  the  physicist  are  super  sensuous  > 
that  is,  they  do  not  at  present  represent  direct  sense- 
impressions  ;  but  the  reader  must  be  careful  not  to 
confuse  this  kind  of  supersensuousness  with  that  of 
the  metaphysician.  The  physicist  looks  upon  the 
atom  in  one  or  other  of  two  different  ways :  either 
the  atom  is  real,  that  is,  capable  of  being  a  direct 
sense-impression,  or  else  it  is  ideal,  that  is,  a  purely 
mental  conception  by  aid  of  which  we  are  enabled  to 
formulate  natural  laws.1  It  is  either  a  product  of  the 
perceptive  faculty,  or  of  the  reflective  or  reasoning 
faculty  in  man.  It  may  pass  from  the  latter  to  the 
former,  from  the  ideal  stage  to  the  real ;  but  till  it  does 
so,  it  remains  merely  a  conceptual  basis  for  classifying 
sense-impressions,  it  is  not  an  actuality.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  metaphysician  asserts  an  existence  for  the 
supersensuous  which  is  unconditioned  by  the  per- 
ceptive or  reflective  faculties  in  man.  His  super- 
sensuous  is  at  once  incapable  of  being  a  sense- 

1  That  is,  it  is  part  of  the  physicist's  mental  shorthand. 


Il6  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

impression,  and  yet  has  a  real  existence  apart  from 
the  imagination  of  men.  It  is  needless  to  say  that 
such  an  existence  involves  an  unproven  and  un- 
demonstrable  dogma.  Nevertheless,  the  magnitude 
of  the  gulf  between  the  supersensuous  of  the  phy- 
sicist and  that  of  the  metaphysician  is  frequently 
neglected,  and  we  are  told  that  it  is  as  logical  to 
discuss  "  things-in-themselves "  as  molecules  and 
atoms  ! 


§  10.— Progress  in  the  Formulating  of  Natural  Law. 

By  the  formation  of  conceptions,  which  may  or 
may  not  have  perceptual  equivalents  in  the  sphere  of 
sense-impression,  the  scientist  is  able  to  classify  and 
compare  phenomena.  From  their  classification  he 
passes  to  formulae  or  scientific  laws  describing  their 
sequences  and  relationships.  The  wider  the  range 
of  phenomena  embraced,  and  the  simpler  the  state- 
ment of  the  law,  the  more  nearly  we  consider  that  he 
has  reached  a  "  fundamental  law  of  nature."  The 
progress  of  science  lies  in  the  continual  discovery  of 
more  and  more  comprehensive  formulae,  by  aid  of 
which  we  can  classify  the  relationships  and  sequences 
of  more  and  more  extensive  groups  of  phenomena. 
The  earlier  formulae  are  not  necessarily  wrong,  they 
are  merely  replaced  by  others  which  in  briefer 
language  describe  more  facts. 

We  cannot  do  better  than  examine  this  process 
very  briefly  in  a  special  case,  namely,  the  motion  of 
the  planetary  system.  An  easily  observed  part  of 
this  motion  was  the  daily  passage  of  the  sun,  its 
rising  in  the  East  and  setting  in  the  West.  A  primi- 
tive description  of  the  motion  consisted  in  the  state- 


THE   SCIENTIFIC   LAW.  1 1/ 

ment  that  the  same  sun  which  set  in  the  West  passed, 
hidden  by  northern  mountains,  along  the  surface  of 
the^to  earth  and  rose  again  in  the  East  The  descrip- 
tion was  clearly  very  insufficient,  but  it  was  a  first 
attempt  at  a  scientific  formula.  An  obvious  improve- 
ment was  soon  made  by  limiting  the  surface  of  the 
earth  and  supposing  the  sun  to  go  below  the  solid  earth. 
The  motion  of  the  sun  taken  in  conjunction  with 
the  motion  of  the  stars  led  early  astronomers  to  con- 
clude that  the  earth  was  fixed  in  mid-space,  and  sun 
and  stars  were  daily  carried  round  it.  The  descrip- 
tion thus  improved  was  still  far  from  complete  ;  the 
sun  was  observed  to  vary  its  position  with  regard  to 
the  fixed  stars.  Gradually  and  laboriously  facts  were 
accumulated,  and  in  time  those  early  astronomers  con- 
cluded that  the  sun  went  round  yearly  in  the  same 
circle,  this  circle  itself  being  carried  round  with  the 
starry  heavens  once  in  a  day.  This  formula  embraced 
a  wider  field  of  phenomena  than  the  earlier  ones,  and 
probably  was  as  exact  a  description  as  men's  percep- 
tions of  earth  and  sun  allowed  when  it  was  invented. 
Hipparchus  improved  it  by  placing  the  earth  not 
exactly  in  the  centre  of  the  sun's  circle,  and  thus  more 
accurately  described  certain  apparent  irregularities  in 
the  sun's  motion.  A  still  more  complete  description 
was  adopted  by  Ptolemy  (A.D.  140)  nearly  three  hundred 
years  after  Hipparchus,  who,  fixing  the  spherical  earth, 
considered  sun  and  moon  to  move  in  circles  yearly 
round  the  earth,  and  the  other  planets  in  circles,  whose 
centres  again  described  circles  round  the  earth.  The 
whole  of  this  system  revolved  daily  round  the  earth 
with  the  stars.  This,  the  famous  Ptolemaic  system, 
remained  for  many  centuries  the  current  formula,  and 
even  to  this  day  the  eccentrics  of  Hipparchus  and! 


Il8  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

epicycles  of  Ptolemy  are  not  without  service  as  ele- 
ments of  the  more  modern  description.  It  would  be 
wrong,  I  think,  to  say  that  the  Ptolemaic  system  was 
an  erroneous  explanation,  it  was  simply  an  in- 
sufficient attempt  to  describe  in  brief  and  accurate 
language  a  too  limited  range  of  phenomena.  Then 
at  the  end  of  the  Middle  Ages  came  Copernicus  who 
got  rid  of  the  cumbersome  sphere  carrying  the  fixed 
stars  by  simply  considering  the  earth  to  rotate 
round  its  axis  and  of  the  epicycles,  if  not  of  the 
eccentrics,  by  treating  the  sun,  not  the  earth,  as 
the  central  point  of  the  system.  Here  was  an  im- 
mense advance  in  brevity  and  accuracy  of  description  ; 
but  still  more  facts  remained  to  be  included,  more 
difficulties  to  be  analyzed  and  overcome.  This  work 
was  largely  done  by  Keppler,  who  conceived  the  earth 
and  planets  to  move  in  certain  curves  termed  ellipses, 
of  which  the  sun  occupied  a  non-central  point  termed 
the  focus.  The  formula  of  Keppler  is  one  of  the 
greatest  achievements  of  the  scientific  method  ;  it  was 
the  work  of  a  disciplined  imagination  analyzing  a 
laborious  and  minute  classification  of  facts.1  A  more 
wide-embracing  statement  than  that  of  Keppler  was 
not  only  possible,  however,  but  required  ;  and  this  was 
provided  by  Newton  in  a  single  formula  which  embraces 
not  only  the  motion  of  the  planets,  but  that  of  their 
moons  and  of  bodies  at  their  surfaces.  This  formula  is 
the  well-known  law  of  gravitation,  but  it  is  just  as 
much  a  description  of  what  takes  place  in  planetary 
motion  as  Keppler's  laws  are  a  description — it  is 
simply  a  briefer,  more  accurate,  and  more  wide-em- 

1  The  elaborate  observations  of  Tycho  Brahe.  Keppler  not  only 
stated  the  form  of  the  planetary  path,  but  the  mode  of  its  description 
in  his  famous  three  laws. 


THE  SCIENTIFIC   LAW.  1 19 

bracing  statement.  The  one  can  just  as  fitly  as  the 
other  be  termed  a  natural  law. 

The  law  of  gravitation  is  a  brief  description  of  how 
every  particle  of  matter  in  the  universe  is  altering  its 
motion  with  reference  to  every  other  particle.  It  does 
not  tell  us  why  particles  thus  move  ;  it  does  not  tell 
us  why  the  earth  describes  a  certain  curve  round  the 
sun.  It  simply  resumes,  in  a  few  brief  words,  the 
relationships  observed  between  a  vast  range  of  phe- 
nomena. It  economizes  thought  by  stating  in  mental 
shorthand  that  routine  of  our  perceptions  which  forms 
for  us  the  universe  of  gravitating  matter. 

We  have  in  the  law  of  gravitation  an  excellent 
example  of  a  scientific  law.  We  see  in  its  evolution 
the  continual  struggles  of  the  human  mind  to  reach  a 
more  and  more  comprehensive  and  exact  formula,  and 
at  last  Newton  reaches  one  so  simple  and  so  wide- 
embracing  that  many  have  thought  nothing  further 
can  be  achieved  in  this  direction.  "  Here,"  says  Paul 
du  Bois-Reymond,  "  is  the  limit  to  our  possible  know- 
ledge." If  the  reader  once  grasps  the  characteristics 
of  this  law  of  Newton's  he  will  understand  the  nature 
of  all  scientific  law.  Men  study  a  range  of  facts — in  the 
case  of  nature  the  material  contents  of  their  percep- 
tive faculty — they  classify  and  analyze,  they  discover 
relationships  and  sequences,  and  then  they  describe 
in  the  simplest  possible  terms  the  widest  possible  range 
of  phenomena.  How  idle  is  it,  then,  to  speak  of  the 
law  of  gravitation,  or  indeed  of  any  scientific « law,  as 
ruling  nature.  Such  laws  simply  describe,  they  never 
explain  the  routine  of  our  perceptions,  the  sense-im- 
pressions we  project  into  an  "  outside  world." 

The  scientific  law,  while  thus  the  product  of  a 
rational  analysis  of  facts,  is  always  liable  to  be  re- 


120  THE   GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

placed  by  a  wider  generalization.  Such  replacement 
of  one  formula  by  another  is  indeed  the  regular  course 
of  scientific  progress.  The  only  final  test  we  have  of 
the  truth  of  any  law,  of  the  sufficiency  of  its  descrip- 
tion, the  only  proof  that  our  intellect  has  been  keen 
enough  to  reach  a  formula  extending  to  the  whole 
range  of  facts  it  professes  to  resume,  is  the  actual 
comparison  of  the  results  of  the  formula  with  the 
facts  themselves — that  is,  historical  observation  or 
physical  experiment.  This  test  is  all  that  marks  the 
division  between  scientific  hypothesis  and  scientific 
law,  and  the  scientific  law  itself  must,  with  every 
increase  of  our  perceptive  powers,  return  to  the 
position  of  hypothesis  and  be  anew  put  to  the  test 
of  experience.  Yet  what  philosophic  system,  what 
fantasy  of  the  metaphysical  mind  in  the  region 
of  the  supersensuous  has  stood  like  Newton's 
formula  of  gravitation  without  the  least  change,  the 
least  variation  in  its  statement,  for  more  than  two 
hundred  years  ?  Assuredly  none  ;  they  have  all 
shifted  their  ground  with  every  advance  of  man's 
positive  knowledge.  They  have  not  stood  the  test  of 
experience  ;  they  are  phantasms,  not  truth  ;  for,  as  Sir 
John  Herschel  has  said  : — 

"  The  grand,  and  indeed  only,  character  of  truth  is 
its  capability  of  enduring  the  test  of  universal  expe- 
rience, and  coming  unchanged  out  of  every  possible 
form  of  fair  dicussion." 

§  ii. —  The  Universality  of  Scientific  Law. 

The  universality,  the  absolute  character,  which  we 
attribute  to  scientific  law  is  really  relative  to  the  human 
mind.  It  is  conditioned  : — 

I.  By  the  perceptive  faculty.     The  outside  world, 


THE  SCIENTIFIC   LAW.  121 

the  world  of  phenomena,  must  be  practically  the  same 
for  all  normal  human  beings. 

2.  By  the  reflective  faculty.  The  processes  of 
association  and  logical  inference,  and  the  inner  world 
of  stored  impresses  and  conceptions  must  be  practi- 
cally the  same  for  all  normal  human  beings. 

Now,  when  we  classify  a  number  of  things  together 
and  give  them  the  same  name,  we  can  only  mean  to 
signify  that  they  closely  resemble  each  other  in  struc- 
ture and  action.  Hence  when  we  speak  of  human 
beings  we  are  referring  to  a  class  which  in  the  normal 
civilized  condition  have  perceptive  and  reflective 
faculties  nearly  akin.  It  is  therefore  not  surprising 
that  normal  human  beings  perceive  the  same  world 
of  phenomena,  and  reflect  upon  it  in  much  the  same 
manner.  The  "  universality "  of  natural  law,  the 
"  absolute  validity  "  of  the  scientific  method,  depends 
on  the  resemblance  between  the  perceptive  and  reflec- 
tive faculties  of  one  human  mind  and  those  of  a  second. 
Human  minds  are,  within  limits,  all  receiving  and  sift- 
ing-machines  of  one  type.  They  accept  only  particular 
classes  of  sense-impressions — being  like  automatic 
sweetmeat-boxes  which  if  well  constructed  refuse  to 
act  for  any  coin  but  a  penny — and  having  received 
their  material  they  arrange  and  analyze  it,  provided 
they  are  in  working  order,  in  practically  the  same 
manner.  If  they  do  not  arrange  and  analyze  it  in 
this  manner  we  say,  that  the  mind  is  disordered,  the 
reason  wanting,  the  person  mad.  The  sense-im- 
pressions of  a  madman  may  be  as  much  reality  for 
him  as  our  sense-impressions  are  for  us,  but  his  mind 
does  not  sift  them  in  the  normal  human  fashion,  and 
for  him,  therefore,  our  laws  of  nature  are  without 
meaning. 


122  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

§  12. —  The  Routine  of  Perceptions  is  possibly  a  Product  of  the 
Perceptive  Faculty. 

The  idea  of  the  human  mind  as  a  sorting-machine 
is  not  without  suggestion  with  regard  to  another 
important  matter,  namely,  the  routine  nature  of 
our  sense-impressions.  How  far  does  this  routine 
of  sense-impressions  depend  upon  the  perceptive 
faculty  ?  How  far  does  it  lie  outside  that  faculty  in 
the  unknown  and  unknowable  beyond  of  sensation 
(p.  82)  ?  The  question  is  one  to  which  at  present  no 
definite  answer  can  be  given,  and  perhaps  one  to 
which  no  answer  can  ever  be  found.  If,  with  the 
materialists,  we  make  matter  the  thing-in-itself,  we 
throw  the  routine  back  on  something  behind  sense- 
impressions,  and,  therefore,  unknowable.  Precisely 
the  same  happens  if,  with  Berkeley,  we  attribute  the 
routine  to  the  immediate  action  of  a  deity.  Ma- 
terialist and  idealist  are  here  at  one  in  casting  the 
routine  of  sense-impression  into  the  unknowable. 
But  the  business  of  the  scientist  is  to  know,  and 
therefore  he  will  not  lightly  assent  to  throwing  any- 
thing into  the  unknowable  so  long  as  known  "causes" 
have  not  been  shown  to  be  insufficient.  The  scientific 
tendency  would  therefore  be  to  consider  the  routine 
of  our  perceptions  as  due  in  some  way  to  the  structure 
of-  our  perceptive  faculty  before  we  appeal  to  any 
supersensuous  aid.  Far,  indeed,  as  science  at  present 
stands  from  any  definite  solution  of  the  problem, 
there  are  yet  one  or  two  points  which  it  may  not  be 
unprofitable  to  consider. 

In  the  first  place,  have  we  any  evidence  that  the 
perceptive  faculty  is  a  selective  machine  ?  We  have 
already  seen  that  it  is  possible  at  times  for  us  to  be 
unconscious  of  sensations  which  on  other  occasions 


THE   SCIENTIFIC  LAW.  123 

we  may  keenly  appreciate  (p.  53).  We  have  seen 
that  the  outside  world  constructed  by  an  insect  in  all 
probability  differs  widely  from  our  own  (p.  101).  To 
assume,  therefore,  sensations  which  form  no  part  of 
our  consciousness,  perhaps  no  part  of  any  conscious- 
ness, is  not  an  illogical  inference,  for  we  proceed  only 
from  the  known  to  what  is  like  the  known  (p.  72), 
to  an  eject  which  might  have  been,  or  may  one  day  be, 
an  object. x  No  better  way  of  realizing  the  different 
selective  powers  of  diverse  perceptive  faculties  can 
be  found  than  a  walk  with  a  dog.  The  man  looks 
out  upon  a  broad  landscape,  and  the  signs  of  life  and 
activity  he  sees  in  the  far  distance  may  have  deep 
meaning  for  him.  The  dog  surveys  the  same  land- 
scape indifferently,  but  his  whole  attention  is  devoted 
to  matters  in  his  more  immediate  neighbourhood,  of 
which  the  man  is  only  indirectly  conscious  through 
the  activity  of  the  dog.  Many  things  may  be  going 
on  in  the  distance,  which,  if  at  hand,  would  have 
considerable  interest  for  the  dog:  some  way  off  the  man 
perceives  the  rabbits  in  the  field  skirting  the  copse, 
further  off  still  a  flock  of  sheep  on  the  high-road,  and 
behind  them  the  shepherd  with  his  collie — all  these 
remain  unobserved  by  the  dog,  or  if  observed,  un- 
reasoned on.  Clearly  the  sense-impressions  corre- 
sponding to  the  distant  landscape  are  far  less  complex 
and  intense  in  the  dog  than  in  the  man.  The  per- 
ceptive faculty  in  the  dog  selects  certain  sense- 
impressions,  and  these  form  for  it  reality  ;  that  of 
the  man  selects  another  and  probably  far  more 

1  "  A  feeling  can  exist  by  itself  without  forming  part  of  a  conscious- 
ness," writes  Clifford  in  a  paper,  the  main  conclusion  of  which  seems 
to  me,  however,  quite  unproven.  ("  On  the  Nature  of  Things-in-them- 
selves,"  Lectures  and  Essays,  vol.  i.  p.  84). 


124  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

complex  range,  which  form  in  turn  reality  for  him. 
Both  may  be  again  compared  to  automatic  sweet- 
meat-boxes, which  only  work  on  the  insertion  oii 
coins  of  definite  and  different  value.  Objective 
reality  does  not  consist  of  the  same  sense-impressions 
for  man  and  dog. 

If  we  pass  downwards  from  man  to  the  lowest 
forms  of  life,  we  shall  find  the  range  of  sensations 
perceived  becoming  less  and  less  complex  till  they 
cease  altogether  as  perceptions  with  the  cessation  of 
consciousness.  Hence,  if  we  accept  the  theory  of  the 
evolution  of  man  from  the  lowliest  types  of  life,  we 
see  a  wide  field  of  variation  in  the  matter  of  the 
perceptive  faculty  open  to  him.  Man  will  evolve  a 
power  of  perceiving  those  sensations,  the  perception 
of  which  will  on  the  whole  help  him  in  the  struggle 
for  existence.1 

Now,  step  by  step  with  the  perceptive  faculty  the 
reflective  or  reasoning  faculty  is  developed  ;  the 
power  of  sifting  and  arranging  perceptions,  the  power 
of  rapidly  passing  from  sense-impression  to  fitting 
exertion  (p.  55),  is  seen  to  be  a  factor  of  paramount 
importance  to  man  in  the  battle  of  life.  Without 
our  being  able  at  present  to  clearly  understand  the 
relation  between  the  perceptive  and  reflective  faculties 
in  man,  the  nature  of  their  co-ordination,  it  is  still 
reasonable  to  suppose  a  close  relation  between  the 
two  ;  the  one  largely  selects  those  perceptions  which 
the  other  is  capable  of  analyzing  and  resuming  in 
brief  formulae  or  laws.  Within  sufficiently  wide  limits 
the  intensity  of  the  perceptive  faculty  appears  in  all 

1  Light  and  vision,  sound  and  hearing,  extension  and  touch,  are 
known  not  to  be  identical  in  range.  See  Sir  William  Thomson's, 
Popular  Lectures  and  Addresses^  vol.  i.  pp.  278-90. 


THE   SCIENTIFIC   LAW.  125 

forms  of  life  proportional  to  the  reasoning  faculty. x 
A  world  of  sense-impressions  in  no  way  amenable  to 
man's  reason  would  be  very  prejudicial  to  man's  preser- 
vation. In  such  plight  a  man,  like  an  idiot  or  insane 
person,  would  be  incapable  of  analysis,  or  would  analyze 
wrongly;  the  fitting  exertion  would  not  follow  on  the 
sense-impression,  and  this  man  would  have  small 
chance  of  surviving  among  men  whose  perceptive  and 
reasoning  faculties  were  attuned.  Possibly  some  sorts 
of  idiocy  and  madness  are  a  kind  of  atavism,  a  return 
to  variations  of  the  human  mind  in  which  perceptive 
and  reflective  faculties  are  not  co-ordinated—variations 
which  on  the  whole  have  been  eliminated  in  the 
struggle  for  existence.  If  this  interpretation  be  at  all 
a  correct  one— if,  namely,  the  perceptive  faculty  can 
be  so  moulded  in  the  process  of  evolution  as  to  accept 
some  and  reject  other  sense-impressions ;  if,  further, 
the  perceptive  and  reflective  faculties  have  been  de- 
veloped in  co-ordination,  so  that  the  former  accepts 
what,  in  wide  limits,  can  be  analyzed  by  the  latter — • 
then  we  have  advanced  some  way  towards  under- 
standing why  the  routine  of  perceptions  can  be 
expressed  in  brief  formulae  by  the  human  reason. 
The  relation  between  natural  law  in  the  nomic 
(p.  ^footnote]  and  the  scientific  senses  becomes  more 
intimate,  when  we  thus  attribute  the  routine  of  the 
perceptions  to  the  machinery  of  the  perceptive  faculty. 
It  will  not,  however,  do  to  press  this  interpretation 


1  That  woman  has  greater  perceptive,  man  greater  reflective  power, 
is  one  of  those  futilities  which  has  been  used  as  an  excuse  for  hind* 
ranees  to  woman's  development  of  both  faculties.  Exceptions  of 
course  there  are,  but  the  general  rule  seems  to  be  that  the  deeper  the 
intellectual  power  in  both  sexes,  the  wider  is  the  range  of  perceptions, 
the  more  delicately  sensitive  is  the  nervous  system. 


126  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

too  far;  or  at  least  we  must  be  careful  to  remember 
that,  while  the  perceptive  faculty  has  developed  the 
power  of  solely  perceiving  sense-impressions  capable 
of  being  dealt  with  by  the  reflective  faculty,  it 
does  not  follow  that  they  have  already  been  dealt 
with  by  the  latter  faculty.  Otherwise  we  shall  be 
abruptly  confuted  by  the  fact  that  there  are  many 
sense-impressions  which  we  perceive  and  yet  have 
not  classified  and  reduced  to  simple  formulae. 
There  are  many  phenomena  of  which  we  can  at 
present  only  confess  our  ignorance.  Compare, 
for  example,  what  we  know  of  the  tides  and 
the  weather.  Had  Odysseus  and  his  men  been 
stranded  high  and  dry  by  a  spring  tide  on  the 
Thrinacian  Isle  they  would  probably  have  offered  a 
hecatomb  to  Poseidon  praying  him  to  send  another 
spring  tide  on  the  morrow.  A  modern  mariner,  more 
wise  and  less  pious  than  Odysseus,  would  have  con- 
sumed the  kine  of  Helios  in  peace  for  a  fortnight, 
and  then  have  taken  his  departure  with  comparative 
ease.  On  the  other  hand  the  modern  manner,  like 
Odysseus  of  old,  might  still  pray  for  calm  weather, 
thus  projecting  his  inability  to  formulate  a  scientific 
law  into  want  of  routine  and  possible  anomy  (p.  1 14) 
in  the  sequence  of  his  perceptions.  If  we  believe  in 
the  capacity  of  the  reflective  faculty  for  ultimately 
reducing  to  a  brief  formula  or  law  all  types  of 
phenomena,  if  we  believe  in  the  co-ordination  of 
perception  and  reflection,  then  the  weather  will  not 
probably  appear  a  very  strong  argument  against  our 
hypothesis.  It  must  at  least  be  confessed  that  the 
discovery  of  a  hundred  or  a  five  hundred  years'  period 
in  the  weather  would  sadly  discomfort  those  who 
delight  in  assuming  that  some  group  of  perceptions 


THE  SCIENTIFIC  LAW.  127 

at  least  must  be  beyond  the  analysis  of  the  reflective 
faculty.  Yet  such  a  discovery  would  not  now  be 
more  remarkable  than  that  of  the  Chaldean  Saros 
or  eclipse  period, x  must  have  been  to  those  who  looked 
upon  eclipses  as  an  arbitrary  interference  with  their 
perceptions,  and  prayed  vigorously  for  a  restoration 
of  the  light  of  sun  or  moon.  The  coeval  develop- 
ment of  the  perceptive  and  reflective  faculties  asso- 
ciated with  a  power  of  selecting  sensations  in  the 
former  is  possibly  an  important,  but  it  may  not  be 
the  sole,  factor  in  the  marvellous  power  which  the 
reason  possesses  of  describing  wide  ranges  of  phe- 
nomena by  simple  laws.  There  is  another  point 
which  undoubtedly  deserves  notice.  Our  sense- 
impressions  are  indeed  complex  in  their  grouping, 
but  they  come  to  us  by  very  few  and  comparatively 
simple  channels,  namely,  through  the  organs  of  sense. 
The  simplicity  of  the  scientific  law  may  therefore  be 
partly  conditioned  by  the  simplicity  of  the  modes  in 
which  sense-impressions  are  received. 

The  arguments  of  this  section  are,  of  course,  very 
far  from  conclusive.  They  are  only  meant  to  suggest 
the  possibility  that  the  perceptive  faculty  in  itself 
determines  largely  or  entirely  the  routine  of  our 
perceptions.  If  this  be  true  it  will  seem  less  of  a 
marvel  that  the  co-ordinated  reflective  faculty  should 
be  able  to  describe  the  "outside  universe  "  by  com- 
paratively simple  formulae.  On  the  whole  this  seems 
a  more  scientific  hypothesis  than  those  which  make  the 
routine  depend  on  supersensuous  entities,  and  which 
then — to  account  for  the  power  of  the  human  reason 

1  The  Chaldeans  had  discovered  that  eclipses  of  the  sun  and  moon 
recur  in  a  cycle  of  eighteen  years  and  eleven  days,  and  were  thus 
able  to  predict  the  dates  of  their  occurrence. 


THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

to  analyze  nature — endow  those  entities  with  reason 
akin  to  man's,  thus  postulating  thought  and  con- 
sciousness apart  from  that  material  machinery  which 
alone  justifies  our  inferring  its  existence.  The  hypo- 
thesis we  have  discussed,  unproven  as  it  may  be, 
postulates  reason  no  further  than  we  may  logically 
infer  it,  and  at  the  same  time  attempts  to  account 
for  the  power  of  analyzing  the  routine  of  the  percep- 
tions, which  is  undoubtedly  possessed  by  the  human 
reflective  faculty. 

§  13. — The  Mind  as  a  Sorting-Machine. 
It  is  not  hard  to  imagine  by  extension  of  existing 
machinery  a  great  stone-sorting  machine  of  such  a 
character  that,  when  a  confused  heap  of  stones  was 
thrown  in  pell-mell  at  one  end,  some  sizes  would  be 
rejected,  while  the  remainder  would  come  out  at  the 
other  end  of  the  machine  sifted  and  sorted  according 
to  their  sizes.  Thus  a  person  who  solely  regarded  the 
final  results  of  the  machine  might  consider  that 
only  stones  of  certain  sizes  had  any  existence,  and 
that  such  stones  were  always  arranged  according  to 
their  sizes.  In  some  such  way  as  this,  perhaps,  we 
may  look  upon  that  great  sorting-machine  —  the 
human  perceptive  faculty.  Sensations  of  all  kinds 
and  magnitudes  may  flow  into  it,  some  to  be  rejected 
at  once,  others  to  be  sorted  all  orderly,  and  arranged 
in  place  and  time.  It  may  be  the  perceptive  faculty 
itself,  which,  without  our  being  directly  conscious  of 
it,  contributes  the  ordered  sequence  in  time  and  space 
to  our  sense-impressions.  The  routine  of  perception 
may  be  due  to  the  recipient,  and  not  characteristic  of 
the  material.  If  anything  like  this  be  the  case,  then 
(granted  a  co-ordination  of  perceptive  and  reasoning 


THE  SCIENTIFIC  LAW.  1 29 

faculties),  it  will  be  less  surprising  that,  when  the 
human  mind  comes  to  analyze  phenomena  in  time  and 
space,  it  should  find  itself  capable  of  briefly  describ- 
ing the  past,  and  of  predicting  the  future  sequences 
of  all  manner  of  sense-impressions.  From  this 
standpoint  the  nomic  natural  law  is  an  unconscious 
product  of  the  machinery  of  the  perceptive  faculty, 
while  natural  law  in  the  scientific  sense  is  the  con- 
scious product  of  the  reflective  faculty,  analyzing  the 
process  of  perception,  the  working  of  the  sorting- 
machine.  The  whole  of  ordered  nature  is  thus  seen 
as  the  product  of  one  mind — the  only  mind  with  which 
we  are  acquainted — and  the  fact  that  the  routine  of 
perceptions  can  be  expressed  in  brief  formulae  ceases 
to  be  so  mysterious  as  when  we  postulate  a  twofold 
reason,  one  type  characteristic  of  "things-in-them- 
selves,"  beyond  our  sense-impressions,  and  another 
associated  with  the  material  machinery  of  nervous 
organization. 

§  14. — Science,  Natural  Theology,  and  Metaphysics, 

The  reader,  I  trust,  will  treat  these  suggestions  as 
suggestions  and  no  more.  What  we  are  sure  of  is 
a  certain  routine  of  perceptions  and  a  capacity  in  the 
mind  to  resume  them  in  the  mental  shorthand  of 
scientific  law.  What  we  have  no  right  to  infer  is 
that  order,  mind,  or  reason — all  human  characteristics 
or  human  conceptions  falling  on  this  side  of  sense- 
impressions — exist  on  the  other  side  of  sense-impres- 
sions, in  the  unknown  plus  of  sensations  or  in  things- 
in-themselves.  Whatever  there  may  be  on  that 
outside,  we  cannot  logically  infer  it  to  be  like  any- 
thing whatever  on  this  side.  Scientifically  we  must 
remain  agnostic.  If,  however,  it  is  possible  to  conceive 

10 


130  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

the  order,  the  routine  of  perceptions  as  being  due  to 
anything  on  this  side  of  sense-impression,  we  shall 
have  withdrawn  from  the  beyond  the  last  anthropo- 
morphical element,  and  left  it  that  chaos  behind 
sense-impression,  whereof  to  use  the  word  knowledge 
would  be  the  height  of  absurdity. 

To  positive  theology,  to  revelation,  science  has  no 
rejoinder.  It  works  in  a  totally  different  plane. 
Only  when  belief  enters  the  sphere  of  possible 
knowledge,  the  plane  of  reality,  must  science  sternly 
remonstrate ;  only  when  belief  replaces  knowledge 
as  a  basis  of  conduct  is  science  driven  to  criticize 
not  the  reality,  but  the  morality  of  belief.  Quite 
different,  however,  is  the  relation  of  science  to  natural 
theology  and  metaphysics,  when  they  assert  that 
reason  can  help  us  to  some  knowledge  of  the  super- 
sensuous.  Here  science  is  perfectly  definite  and 
clear  ;  natural  theology  and  metaphysics  are  pseudo- 
science.  The  mind  is  absolutely  confined  within  its 
nerve-exchange;  beyond  the  walls  of  sense-impression 
it  can  logically  infer  nothing.  Order  and  reason, 
beauty  and  benevolence,  are  characteristics  and  con- 
ceptions which  we  find  solely  associated  with  the 
mind  of  man,  with  this  side  of  sense-impressions. 
Into  the  chaos  of  sensations  we  cannot  scientifically 
project  them;  we  have  no  ground  whatever  for  assert- 
ing that  any  human  conception  will  suffice  to  describe 
what  may  exist  there,  for  it  lies  outside  the  barrier 
of  sense-impressions  from  which  all  human  concep- 
tions are  ultimately  drawn.  Briefly  chaos  is  all  that 
science  can  logically  assert  of  the  supersensuous — the 
sphere  outside  knowledge,  outside  classification  by 
mental  concepts.  If  the  Brahmins  believe  that  the 
world  arose  from  the  instinct  of  an  infinite  spider, 


THE  SCIENTIFIC  LAW.  131 

for  so  it  has  been  revealed  to  them,  we  may  wonder 
what  the  conceptions  instinct  and  spider  may  be  in 
their  minds,  and  remark  that  their  belief  is  without 
meaning  for  us.  But  if  they  assert  that  the  phe- 
nomenal world  gives  in  itself  evidence  of  being  spun 
from  the  bowels  of  this  monster,  then  we  pass  from 
the  plane  of  belief  to  that  of  reason  and  science, 
and  promptly  demolish  their  fantasy. 

§  15.—  Conclusions. 

It  may  seem  to  the  reader  that  we  have  been 
discussing  at  unjustifiable  length  the  nature  of 
scientific  law.  Yet  therein  we  have  reached  a  point 
of  primary  importance,  a  point  over  which  the  battles 
of  system  and  creed  have  been  long  and  bitter. 
Here  the  materialists  have  thrown  down  the  gauntlet 
to  the  natural  theologians,  and  the  latter  in  their 
turn  have  endeavoured  to  deck  dogma  with  the 
mantle  of  science.  The  world  of  phenomena  for 
the  materialists  was  an  outside  world  unconditioned 
by  man's  perceptive  faculty,  a  world  of  "  dead " 
matter  subjected  for  all  time  to  unchangeable  nomic 
laws  (p.  1 14),  whence  flowed  the  routine  of  our  percep- 
tions. The  Stoics,  with  greater  insight,  found  these 
laws  replete  with  reason,  but,  dogmatic  in  turn,  they 
postulated  a  reason  akin  to  man's  inherent  in  matter. 
The  natural  theologians,  like  the  materialists,  found 
"  dead  "  matter,  but,  like  the  Stoics,  they  saw  strong 
evidence  of  reason  in  its  laws ;  this  reason  they 
placed  in  an  external  lawgiver.  Metaphysician  and 
philosopher  filled  the  measure  of  obscurity  by 
hypotheses  as  to  mind-stuff  and  will  and  conscious- 
ness, which  had  not  become  consciousness,  existing 
behind  the  barrier  of  sense-impression.  Science—' 


132  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

refusing  to  infer  wildly  where  it  cannot  know,  and 
unwilling  to  assume  new  causes  where  the  old  have 
not  yet  been  shown  insufficient — treats  the  "  dead 
matter  "  of  the  materialist  as  a  world  of  sense-impres- 
sions. These  sense-impressions  appear  to  follow  an 
unchanging  routine  capable  of  expression  in  the  brief 
formulae  of  science  because  the  perceptive  and  re- 
flective faculties  are  machines  of  practically  the  same 
type  in  all  normal  human  beings.  Like  the  Stoics,  the 
scientist  finds  evidence  of  reason  in  his  examination 
of  natural  phenomena,  but  he  is  content  to  think  that 
this  reason  may  be  his  own  till  he  discovers  evidence 
to  the  contrary.  He  recognizes  that  the  so-called 
law  of  nature  is  but  a  simple  resume,  a  brief  descrip- 
tion of  a  wide  range  of  his  own  perceptions,  and  that 
the  harmony  between  his  perceptive  and  reasoning 
faculties  is  not  incapable  of  being  traced  to  its 
origin.  Natural  law  appears  to  him  an  intellectual 
product  of  man,  and  not  a  routine  inherent  in  "  dead 
matter."  The  progress  of  science  is  thus  reduced  to 
a  more  and  more  complete  analysis  of  the  perceptive 
faculty — an  analysis  which  unconsciously  and  not 
unnaturally  we  project  into  an  analysis  of  something 
beyond  sense-impression.  Thus  both  the  material 
and  the  laws  of  science  are  inherent  in  ourselves 
rather  than  in  an  outside  world.  Our  groups  of 
perceptions  form  for  us  reality,  and  the  results  of  our 
reasoning  on  these  perceptions  and  the  conceptions 
deduced  from  them  form  our  only  genuine  know- 
ledge. Here  only  we  are  able  to  reach  truth — to 
discover  similarity  and  to  describe  sequence — and  we 
must  remorselessly  criticize  every  step  we  take 
beyond,  if  we  would  avoid  the  "  muddy  speculation  " 
which  will  ever  arise  when  we  attempt  to  extend  the 


THE  SCIENTIFIC   LAW.  133 

field  of  knowledge  by  obscure  definitions  of  natural 
law. 

If  it  should  seem  to  the  reader  that  I  have  too 
narrowly  circumscribed,  not  the  field  of  possible 
human  knowledge,  but  the  meaning  of  the  word 
knowledge  itself,  he  must  remember  the  danger  which 
arises  when  we  employ  terms  without  concise  mean- 
ing and  clearly  defined  limits.  The  right  of  science  to 
deal  with  the  beyond  of  sense-impressions  is  not  the 
subject  of  contest,  for  science  confessedly  claims  no 
such  right.  It  is  within  the  field  of  knowledge  as  we 
have  defined  it,  especially  at  points  where  our  know- 
ledge is  only  in  the  making,  that  the  right  of  science 
has  been  questioned.  It  is  easy  to  replace  ignorance 
by  hypothesis,  and  because  only  the  attainment  of  real 
knowledge  can  in  many  cases  demonstrate  the  false- 
ness of  hypothesis,  it  has  come  about  that  many 
worthy  and  otherwise  excellent  persons  assert  an 
hypothesis  to  be  true,  because  science  has  not  yet  by 
positive  knowledge  demonstrated  its  falsehood.  Here, 
in  the  untilled  part  of  the  heritage  of  science,  lies  the 
playground  of  the  undisciplined  imagination.  Mine, 
says  science  here,  as  it  does  not  claim  of  the  super- 
sensuous,  and  it  hastens  where  it  can  to  take  effective 
occupation.  Science,  we  are  told,  does  not  explain 
the  origin  of  life ;  science  does  not  explain  the 
development  of  man's  higher  faculties  ;  science  does 
not  explain  the  history  of  nations. 

If  by  explain1  is  meant  "describe  in  a  brief  formula," 
let  us  admit  that  science  has  not  yet  fully  analyzed 

1  No  objection  can  be  raised  to  the  words  explain  and  explanation 
if  they  be  used  in  the  sense  of  the  descriptive  how,  and  not  the  deter- 
minative why.  The  former  interpretation  is  the  sole  one  given  to  them 
in  this  work. 


134  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

these  phenomena.  What,  then,  must  follow  the  ad- 
mission ?  Why,  an  honest  confession  of  our  ignorance 
and  not  mistrust  in  our  fundamental  principles — no 
meaningless  hunt  after  unknown  origins  in  the  super- 
sensuous,  until  the  known  field  of  perceptions  has  been 
shown  incapable  of  yielding  the  needful  basis.  To-day 
our  churches  still  offer  up  prayers  for  the  weather,  and 
the  mystery  of  Saturn's  rings  is  hardly  fully  solved  ; 
fifty  years  ago  we  could  give  no  account  of  the  origin 
of  species.  The  mystery  of  the  latter  was  used  as 
striking  evidence  of  the  insufficiency  of  science  and  as 
a  valid  argument  for  an  anomy,  a  separate  creation  of 
each  type  of  life.  Driven  from  one  stronghold  of 
ignorance,  those  who  delight  in  the  undisciplined 
imagination  rather  than  in  positive  knowledge,  only 
seek  refuge  in  another.  The  part  played  years  ago 
by  our  ignorance  as  to  the  origin  of  species  is  now 
played  by  our  supposed  ignorance  as  to  the  origin  of 
the  higher  faculties  in  man.  As  well  take  refuge  in 
the  weather  or  in  the  mystery  of  Saturn's  rings,  for  all 
alike  belong  to  the  world  of  sense-impressions  and 
therefore  are  material  with  which  the  scientific  method 
can  and  will  ultimately  cope. 

Does  science  leave  no  mystery  ?  On  the  contrary, 
it  proclaims  mystery  where  others  profess  knowledge. 
There  is  mystery  enough  in  the  chaos  of  sensations 
and  in  its  capacity  for  containing  those  little  corners 
of  consciousness  which  project  their  own  products, 
of  order  and  law  and  reason,  into  an  unknown  and 
unknowable  world.  There  is  mystery  enough  here, 
only  let  us  clearly  distinguish  it  from  ignorance 
within  the  field  of  possible  knowledge.  The  one  is 
impenetrable,  the  other  we  are  daily  subduing. 


THE  SCIENTIFIC  LAW.  135 

SUMMARY. 

1.  Scientific  law  is  of  a  totally  different  nature  from  civil  law  ;  it  does 
not  involve  an  intelligent  lawgiver,  a  command  and  a  corresponding 
duty.     It  is  a  brief  description  in  mental  shorthand  of  as  wide  a  range 
as  possible  of  the  sequences  of  our  sense-impressions. 

2.  There  are  two  distinct  meanings  to  natural  law  :  the  mere  routine 
of  perception,  and  the  scientific  law  in  the  field  of  nature.  The  "  reason  " 
in  natural  law  is  only  obvious  when  we  speak  of  law  in  the  latter  sense, 
and  it  is  then  really  placed  there  by  the  human  mind.     Thus  the  sup- 
posed reason  behind  natural  law  does  not  enable  us  to  pass  from  the 
routine  of  perceptions  to  anything  of  the  nature  of  reason  behind  the 
world  of  sense-impression. 

3.  The  fact  that  the  human  reflective  faculty  is  able  to   express  in 
mental  formulae  the  routine  of  perceptions  may  be  due  to  this  routine 
being  a  product  of  the  perceptive  faculty  itself.     The  perceptive  faculty 
appears  to  be  selective    and  to  have  developed  in  co-ordination  with 
the  reflective  faculty.     Of  the  world  outside  sense-impression  science 
can  only  logically  infer  chaos,  or  the  absence  of  the  conditions  of  know- 
ledge ;   no    human  concept,  order,  reason,  or  consciousness,   can  be 
logically  projected  into  it. 


LITERATURE. 

AUSTIN,  J. — Lectures  on  Jurisprudence.  London,  1879.  (Especially 
Lectures  I.  to  V.) 

HUME,  D. — Dialogues  concerning  Natural  Religion  (pp.  375-468  of 
vol.  ii.  of  The  Philosophical  Works,  edited  by  Green  and  Grose). 

STUART,  J. — A  Chapter  of  Science  ;  or,  What  is  a  Law  of  Nature  ? 
London,  1868.  (A  series  of  six  lectures,  of  which  the  first  five  can 
still  be  read  with  some  profit,  if  read  cautiously,  while  the  last 
forms  for  the  student  of  logic  a  useful  study  in  paralogisms. ) 


CHAPTER  IV. 
CAUSE  AND  EFFECT.    PROBABILITY. 

§  i. — Mechanism. 

THE  discussion  of  the  previous  chapter  has  led  us 
to  see  that  law  in  the  scientific  sense  only  describes 
in  mental  shorthand  the  sequences  of  our  perceptions. 
It  does  not  explain  why  those  perceptions  have  a 
certain  order,  nor  why  that  order  repeats  itself ;  the 
law  discovered  by  science  introduces  no  element  of 
necessity  into  the  sequence  of  our  sense-impressions  ; 
it  merely  gives  a  concise  statement  of  hoiv  changes 
are  taking  place.  That  a  certain  sequence  has  occurred 
and  recurred  in  the  past  is  a  matter  of  experience  to 
which  we  give  expression  in  the  concept  causation; 
that  it  will  continue  to  recur  in  the  future  is  a  matter 
of  belief  to  which  we  give  expression  in  the  concept 
probability.  Science  in  no  case  can  demonstrate  any 
inherent  necessity  in  a  sequence,  nor  prove  with  ab- 
solute certainty  that  it  must  be  repeated.  Science  for 
the  past  is  a  description,  for  the  future  a  belief;  it  is  not, 
and  has  never  been,  an  explanation,  if  by  this  word  is 
meant  that  science  shows  the  necessity  of  any  sequence 
of  perceptions.  Science  cannot  demonstrate  that  a 
cataclasm  will  not  engulf  the  universe  to-morrow,  but 
it  can  prove  that  past  experience,  so  far  from  providing 
a  shred  of  evidence  in  favour  of  any  such  occur- 


CAUSE  AND  EFFECT.      PROBABILITY.  137 

rence,  does,  even  in  the  light  of  our  ignorance  of  any 
necessity  in  the  sequence  of  our  perceptions,  give  an 
overwhelming  probability  against  such  a  cataclasm. 
If  the  reader  has  once  fully  grasped  that  science  is 
an  intellectual  resumt  of  past  experience  and  a  mental 
balancing  of  the  probability  of  future  experience,  he 
will  be  in  no  danger  of  contrasting  the  "  mechanical 
explanation  "  of  science  with  the  "  intellectual  descrip- 
tion "  of  mythology. 

Some  years  ago  (1885)  Mr.  Gladstone  wrote  a 
remarkable  article  in  The  Nineteenth  Century  in  which 
he  inveighed  against  the  u  dead  mechanism  "  to  which 
he  asserted  men  of  science  reduced  the  universe.  He 
contrasted  the  mechanical  with  the  intellectual,  and 
bravely  defended  what  he  termed  the  "  majestic  process 
of  creation  "  described  in  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis 
against  the  Darwinian  theory  of  evolution.  He  has 
recently  repeated  several  of  his  arguments  in  a  more 
elaborate  work.1  Now,  when  a  man  of  Mr.  Gladstone's 
ability  states  a  paradox  of  this  kind,  we  may  be  fairly 
certain  that  it  arises  from  some  popular  confusion  in 
the  use  of  terms,  and  it  befits  us  to  inquire  how 
popular  and  scientific  usage  differ  as  to  the  word 
mechanical.  Unfortunately,  some  more  or  less  super- 
ficial works  on  natural  science  give  currency  to  the 
notion  that  mechanics  is  a  code  of  rules  which  nature 
of  inherent  necessity  obeys.  We  are  told  in  books 
published  even  within  the  last  few  years  that  mechanics 
is  the  science  of  force,  that  force  is  the  cause  which 
produces  or  tends  to  produce  change  of  motion,  and 
that  force  is  inherent  in  matter.  Force  thus  appears  to 
the  popular  mind  as  an  agent  inherent  in  unconscious 
matter  producing  change.  This  agent  is  very  natu- 

1  The  Impregnabk  Rock  of  Holy  Scripture.      London,  1890. 


138  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

rally  contrasted  with  the  will  of  a  living  being,  the 
consciousness  of  a  capacity  to  produce  motion.  In 
matter  this  consciousness  cannot  be  inferred,  and  thus 
force  is  contrasted  as  a  "  dead  "  agent  with  will  as  a 
"living"  agent.  The  mind  which  has  not  probed  beyond 
the  surface  of  physics  sympathizes  with  Mr.  Gladstone's 
revolt  against  the  "dead  mechanism"  to  which,  in 
the  imagination  of  both,  science  reduces  the  universe. 
Now  "matter"  is  for  us  a  groupof  sense-impressions  and 
"matter  in  motion  "  is  a  sequence  of  sense-impressions. 
Hence  that  which  causes  change  of  motion  *  must  be 
that  which  determines  a  sequence  of  sense-impressions, 
or,  in  other  words,  it  is  the  source  of  a  routine  of  per- 
ceptions. But  the  source  of  such  routine,  as  we  have 
seen,  lies  either  in  the  field  of  the  unthinkable  beyond 
sense-impression  or  else  in  the  nature  of  the  perceptive 
faculty  itself.  The  "cause  of  change  in  motion  "  thus 
either  lies  in  the  unthinkable  or  is  a  factor  of  percep- 
tion ;  in  neither  case  can  it  with  any  intelligible  meaning 
of  the  words  be  spoken  of  as  a  "  dead  agent."  In  the 
former  case  the  cause  of  change  is  unknowable,  in 
the  latter  it  is  unknown,  and  may  long  remain  so,  for 
we  are  very  far  at  present  from  understanding  how 
the  perceptive  faculty  can  condition  a  routine  of  per- 
ceptions. Science  does  not  deal  with  the  unknowable, 
and  if  force  be  not  unknowable,  but  unknown,  then 
mechanics  as  the  science  of  force  would  as  yet  have 
made  no  progress.  The  reality  is  indeed  different 
from  this.  One  of  the  greatest  of  German  physicists, 

1  We  shall  see  reason  in  the  sequel  for  asserting  that  "  motion  "  is  a 
conception,  rather  than  a  perception — a  scientific  mode  of  representing 
change  of  sense-impressions,  rather  than  a  sense-impression  itself.  In 
this  chapter,  however,  the  term  "motion  "  is  used  in  its  popular  sense 
for  a  well-marked  class  of  sequences  of  sense-impression. 


CAUSE  AND   EFFECT.      PROBABILITY.  139 

Kirchhoff,  thus  commences  his   classical  treatise   on 
mechanics x : — 

"  Mechanics  is  the  science  of  motion ;  we  define 
as  its  object  the  complete  description  in  the  simplest 
possible  manner  of  such  motions  as  occur  in  nature." 

In  this  definition  of  KirchhofFs  lies,  I  venture  to 
think,  the  only  consistent  view  of  mechanism  and  the 
true  conception  of  scientific  law.  Mechanics  does  not 
differ,  as  so  often  has  been  asserted,  from  biology  or 
any  other  branch  of  science  in  its  essential  principles, 
The  laws  of  motion  no  more  account  than  the  lawsof 
cell-development  for  the  routine  of  perception  ;  both 
solely  attempt  to  describe  as  completely  and  simply 
as  possible  the  repeated  sequences  of  our  sense-im- 
pressions. Mechanical  science  no  more  explains  or 
accounts  for  the  motion  of  a  molecule  or  a  planet  than 
biological  science  accounts  for  the  growth  of  a  cell. 
The  difference  between  the  two  branches  of  science 
is  rather  quantitative  than  qualitative ;  that  is,  the 
descriptions  of  mechanics  are  simpler  and  more  general 
than  those  of  biology.  So  wide-embracing  and  general 
are  the  laws  of  motion,  so  completely  do  they  describe 
our  past  experience  of  many  forms  of  change,  that 
with  a  considerable  degree  of  confidence  we  believe 
they  will  be  found  to  describe  all  forms  of  change.  It 
is  not  a  question  of  reducing  the  universe  to  a  "  dead 
mechanism,"  but  of  measuring  the  amount  of  pro- 
bability that  one  description  of  change  of  a  highly 
generalized  and  simple  kind  will  ultimately  be  recog- 
nized as  capable  of  replacing  another  description  of 
a  more  specialized  and  complex  character.  It  is  not 
taking  biology  out  of  one  branch  of  what  might  be 

1  Vorlesungen  uber  mathematische  Physik.  Bd.  I.  Mechanik>  S.  I. 
Berlin,  1876. 


146  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

termed  descriptive  science  and  removing  it  into  another 
— that  of  prescriptive  science.  Here  by  prescriptive 
science  we  denote  an  imaginary  aspect  of  science,  which 
mechanics  are  too  frequently  supposed  to  present, 
namely,  that  of  deducing  some  inherent  necessity  in 
the  routine  of  perceptions,  instead  of  merely  describing 
that  routine  in  simple  statements.  When,  therefore, 
we  say  that  we  have  reached  a  "  mechanical  explana- 
tion "  of  any  phenomenon,  we  only  mean  that  we  have 
described  in  the  concise  language  of  mechanics  a 
certain  routine  of  perceptions.  We  are  neither  able 
to  explain  why  sense-impressions  have  a  definite 
sequence,  nor  to  assert  that  there  is  really  an  element 
of  necessity  in  the  phenomenon.  Regarded  from  this 
standpoint  the  laws  of  mechanics  are  seen  to  be 
essentially  an  intellectual  product,  and  it  appears  ab- 
solutely unreasonable  to  contrast  the  mechanical  with 
the  intellectual  when  once  these  words  are  grasped  in 
their  accurate  scientific  sense. 

§  2. — Force  as  a  Cause. 

If  force  be  looked  upon  as  the  cause  of  change  in  the 
sense  that  it  necessitates  a  certain  routine  of  percep- 
tions, then  we  have  no  means  of  dealing  with  force.  It 
may  be  the  structure  of  the  perceptive  faculty,  or  it 
may  be  any  of  the  phantasms  with  which  metaphy- 
sicians people  the  beyond  of  sense-impression.  Force 
will  not,  therefore,  aid  us  in  our  search  for  a  scientific 
conception  of  cause.  As  we  have  seen  that  there  are 
two  or  even  three  ideas  conveyed  by  the  one  term  law, 
so  there  are  at  least  two  ideas  associated  with  the 
word  cause,  and  their  confusion  has  also  led  to  as  much 
"  muddy  speculation."  Let  us  first  investigate  the 
popular  idea  of  cause  and  then  see  how  this  is  related 


CAUSE  AND   EFFECT.      PROBABILITY.  141 

to  the  scientific  definition.  A  very  slight  amount  of 
observation  has  shown  men  that  certain  sequences  of 
change  apparently  arise  from  the  voluntary  action,  the 
will  of  a  living  agent.  I  take  up  a  stone  ;  no  one  can 
predict  with  certainty  what  I  shall  do  with  it.  What 
follows  my  picking  up  the  stone  is  to  all  appearances 
a  new  sequence  quite  independent  of  any  which 
preceded  it.  I  can  let  it  fall  again  ;  I  can  put  it  into 
my  pocket,  or  I  may  throw  it  into  the  air  in  any 
direction  and  with  any  of  a  great  variety  of  speeds. 
The  result  of  my  action  may  be  a  long  sequence  of 
physical  phenomena  to  describe  which  mechanically 
would  require  the  solution  of  complex  problems  in 
sound,  heat,  and  elasticity.  The  sequence,  however, 
appears  to  start  in  an  act  of  mine,  in  my  will,  /appear 
to  have  called  it  into  existence,  and  in  ordinary  language 
I  am  spoken  of  as  the  cause  of  the  resulting  pheno- 
mena. In  this  sense  of  the  word  cause  I  appear  to 
differ  qualitatively  from  any  other  stage  in  the 
sequence.  Had  the  hand  of  a  stronger  man  compelled 
mine  to  throw  the  stone,  I  should  at  once  have  sunk 
into  a  link  in  the  chain  of  phenomena;  he,  not  I,  would 
have  been  the  cause  of  the  resulting  motion. 

It  is  certainly  true  that  even  in  popular  usage  inter- 
mediate stages  in  the  sequence  will  occasionally  be 
spoken  of  as  causes.  If  the  stone  from  my  hand  break 
a  window,  the  cause  of  the  broken  window  might  very 
likely  be  spoken  of  as  the  moving  stone.  But  al- 
though this  usage,  as  we  shall  see  afterwards,  is  an 
approach  to  the  scientific  usage  of  the  word  cause,  it 
yet  involves  in  the  popular  estimation  an  idea  of  en- 
forcement which  is  not  in  the  latter.  That  the  stone 
moving  with  a  certain  speed  must  produce  the 
destruction  of  the  window  is,  I  think,  the  idea 


142  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

involved  in  thus  speaking  of  the  moving  stone  as 
the  cause  of  the  breakage.  Were  our  perceptive 
organs  sufficiently  powerful,  what  science  conceives 
that  we  should  see  before  the  impact  would  be 
particles  of  window  and  particles  of  stone  moving 
in  a  certain  manner,  and  after  the  impact  would  be 
the  same  particles  moving  in  a  very  different 
manner.  We  might  carefully  describe  these  motions, 
but  we  should  be  unable  to  say  why  one  stage  would 
follow  another,  just  as  we  can  describe  how  a  stone 
falls  to  the  earth,  but  not  say  why  it  does.  Thus, 
scientifically  the  idea  of  necessity  in  the  stages  of  the 
sequence — stone  in  motion,  broken  window — the  idea 
of  enforcement  would  disappear  ;  we  should  have  a 
routine  of  experience,  but  an  unexplained  routine. 
Hence,  when  we  speak  of  the  stages  of  a  sequence  in 
ordinary  life  as  causes,  I  do  not  think  it  is  because  we 
are  approaching  the  scientific  standpoint,  but  I  fear  it 
arises  from  our  associating,  through  long  usage,  the 
idea  of  force  with  the  stone.  The  stone  is  the  cause 
of  certain  new  motions,  just  as  I  am  looked  upon  as 
the  cause  of  certain  motions  in  the  stone — that  is, 
both  stone  and  I  are  supposed  to  enforce  subse- 
quent stages  in  the  sequence.  Now  the  reader 
who  has  once  dismissed  the  notion  of  force  as  a 
cause,  which  I  think  he  will  probably  be  prepared 
to  do,  will  perhaps  admit  that  there  is  no  element  of 
enforcement,  but  merely  a  routine  of  experience  in 
the  motions  of  particles  of  stone  and  glass.  Still  he 
may  say  that  the  will  of  a  living  agent  does  seem  to  him 
a  cause  of  motion  in  the  necessarian  sense.  Nor  would 
he  be  in  this  unreasonable,  for  I  must  confess  that  to 
attribute  sequences  of  motion  to  will  seems  at  first 
sight  a  more  scientific  hypothesis  than  to  attribute 


CAUSE  AND   EFFECT.      PROBABILITY.  143 

them  to  an  unknown  and  possibly  unknowable  source 

force. 

§  3-—  Will  as  a  Cause. 

It  is  not  unnatural  that  human  beings  should  be 
impressed  at  a  very  early  stage  of  their  mental  growth 
with  the  real,  or  at  any  rate  apparent,  power  which 
lies  in  their  will  of  originating  "  motion."  In  this 
manner  we  find  that  most  primitive  peoples  attribute 
all  motions  to  some  will  behind  the  moving  body ; 
for  their  first  conception  of  the  cause  of  motion  lies  in 
their  own  will.  Thus  they  consider  the  sun  as  carried 
round  by  a  sun-god,  the  moon  by  a  moon-god,  while 
rivers  flow,  trees  grow,  and  winds  blow  owing  to  the 
will  of  a  spirit  which  dwells  within  them.  It  is  only 
in  the  long  course  of  ages  that  mankind  more  or  less 
clearly  recognizes  will  as  associated  with  consciousness 
and  a  definite  physiological  structure ;  then  the 
spiritualistic  explanation  of  motion  is  gradually 
displaced  by  the  scientific  description  ;  we  eliminate  in 
one  case  after  another  the  direct  action  of  will  in  the 
motion  of  natural  bodies. x  The  idea,  however,  of 
enforcement,  of  some  necessity  in  the  order  of  a 
sequence  remains  deeply  rooted  in  men's  minds,  as  a 
fossil  from  the  spiritualistic  explanation  of  will  as  the 
cause  of  motion.  This  idea  is  preserved  in  association 
with  the  scientific  description  of  motion,  and  in  the 
materialist's  notion  of  force  as  that  which  necessitates 
certain  changes  or  sequences  of  motion,  we  have  the 
ghost  of  the  old  spiritualism.  The  force  of  the 
materialist  is  the  will  of  the  old  spiritualist  separated 

1  The  spiritualistic  explanation  still  of  course  exists  where  the  scientific 
analysis  is  incomplete.  We  continue  to  appeal  to  a  spirit  "at  whose 
command  the  winds  blow  and  lift  up  the  waves  of  the  sea  and  who 
stilleth  the  waves  thereof,"  or  who  "  sends  a  plague  of  rain  and  waters.'' 


144  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

from  consciousness.  Both  carry  us  into  the  region 
beyond  our  sense-impressions,  both  are  therefore 
metaphysical ;  but  perhaps  the  inference  of  the  old 
spiritualist  was,  if  illegitimate,  less  absurdly  so  than 
that  of  the  modern  materialist,  for  the  spiritualist  did 
not  infer  will  to  exist  beyond  the  sphere  of  conscious- 
ness with  which  he  had  always  found  will  associated. 

Force  as  cause  of  motion r  is  exactly  on  the  same 
footing  as  a  tree-god  as  cause  of  growth — both  are 
but  names  which  hide  our  ignorance  of  the  why  in 
the  routine  of  our  perceptions. 

§  4. — Secondary  Causes  involve  no  Enforcement. 

Let  us  endeavour  to  see  a  little  more  closely  how 
the  idea  of  any  inherent  necessity  in  the  particular 
order  taken  by  our  perceptions  disappears  from  the 
scientific  conception  of  a  sequence  of  motions — at 
least  from  all  but  the  first  stage,  if  the  sequence  arise 
from  an  apparent  act  of  will.  Still  speaking  in  the 
popular  sense,  we  will  term  the  act  of  will,  if  it  exists, 
a  first  cause,  and  the  successive  stages  of  the  sequence 
secondary  causes.  Our  present  proposition  is  that 
the  scientific  description  of  motion  involves  no  idea 
of  enforcement  in  the  successive  stages  of  motion. 
We  shall  see  in  the  sequel  that  the  whole  tendency 
of  modern  physics  has  been  to  describe  natural 
phenomena  by  reducing  them  to  conceptual  motions. 
From  these  motions  we  construct  the  more  complex 
motions  by  aid  of  which  we  describe  actual  sequences 
of  sense-impressions.  But  in  no  single  case  have 
we  discovered  why  it  is  that  these  motions  are 

1  Force  as  a  name  used  for  a  particular  measure  of  motion  will  be 
found  in  our  chapter  on  the  "  Laws  of  Motion"  to  involve  no  obscurity, 
and  to  be  in  itself  a  convenient  term. 


CAUSE  AND   EFFECT.      PROBABILITY.  145 

taking  place  ;  science  describes  how  they  take 
place,  but  the  why  remains  a  mystery.  To  term 
it  force  might  not  be  so  productive  of  .obscu- 
rity as  it  is,  were  there  any  suggestion  in  the  ele- 
mentary text-books  that  the  cause  of  motion,  or 
of  change  in  motion,  may  be  the  nature  of  the 
perceptive  faculty,  or  will,  or  the  deity,  or  any  un- 
knowable x  amid  an  unthinkable  y  and  z.  The  glib 
transition  from  force  as  a  cause  to  force  as  a  measure 
of  motion  too  often  screens  the  ignorance  which  it 
is  as  much  the  duty  of  science  to  proclaim  from 
the  house-tops  as  it  is  its  duty  to  assert  knowledge  on 
other  points.  Primitive  man  placed  a  sun-god  behind 
the  sun  (as  some  of  us  still  place  a  storm-god  behind 
the  storm),  because  he  did  not  see  how  and  why  it 
moved.  The  physicist  now  proceeds  to  describe,  how 
the  sun  moves,  by  describing  how  a  particle  of  earth 
and  a  particle  of  sun  move  in  each  other's  presence. 
The  description  of  that  motion  is  given  by  Newton's 
law  of  gravitation,  but  the  why  of  that  motion  is  just 
as  mysterious  to  us  as  the  motion  of  the  sun  to  the 
barbarian.1  No  one  knows  why  two  ultimate  particles 
influence  each  other's  motion.  Even  if  gravitation 
be  analyzed  and  described  by  the  motion  of  some 

1  The  reader  will  find  it  profitable  to  analyze  what  is  meant  by  such 
statements  as  that  the  law  of  gravitation  causes  bodies  to  fall  to  the 
earth.  This  law  really  describes  how  bodies  do  fall  according  to  our 
past  experience.  It  tells  us  that  a  body  at  the  surface  of  the  earth  falls 
about  sixteen  feet  towards  the  earth  in  the  first  second,  and  at  the  dis- 
tance of  the  moon  about  -^rs^  part  of  this  distance  in  the  same  time. 
The  law  of  gravitation  describes  the  rate  at  which  a  body  falls,  or, 
better,  the  rate  at  which  its  motion  is  changed  at  diverse  distances,  and 
the  force  of  gravitation  is  really  a  certain  measure  of  this  change  of 
motion,  and  no  useful  purpose  can  be  served  by  defining  it  as  the 
cause  of  change  in  motion.  Other  physical  laws  ought  to  be  inter* 
prcted  in  the  same  anti-metaphysical  manner. 

II 


146  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

simpler  particle  or  ether-element,  the  whole  will 
still  be  a  description,  and  not  an  explanation,  of 
motion.  Science  would  still  have  to  content  itself 
with  recording  the  how.  In  what  we  have  termed 
secondary  causes,  therefore,  science  finds  no  element 
of  enforcement,  solely  the  routine  of  experience- 
But  the  idea  of  will  as  a  first  cause  has  been  over  and 
over  again  associated  with  secondary  causes.  Aris- 
totle, noting  the  difficulty  of  explaining  why  motions 
take  place,  introduced  not  only  God  as  a  first  cause, 
but,  like  primitive  man,  made  God  an  immediate 
source  of  the  enforcement  in  every  secondary  cause. 
God,  Aristotle  held,  is  continually  imparting  motion 
to  all  the  bodies  in  the  universe,  and  so  producing 
phenomena.  Aristotle's  doctrine  was  accepted  by 
the.  mediaeval  schoolmen,  and  for  many  centuries  re- 
mained fundamental  in  philosophical  and  theological 
writings.  Schopenhauer,  the  German  metaphysician, 
perceiving  that  the  only  known  apparent  first  cause 
of  motion  was  will,  placed  will  behind  all  the  pheno- 
mena of  the  universe,  much  like  the  barbarian  who 
postulates  the  will  of  a  storm-god  behind  the  storm.1 
But  however  little  logical  basis  these  metaphysical 
speculations  possess — all  failing  to  satisfy  our  canons 
of  legitimate  inference  (p.  72) — they  still  suffice  to 
mark  the  distinction  between  the  popular  or  meta- 
physical conception  of  cause  as  enforcement,  and  the 
scientific  conception  of  cause  as  the  routine  of  experi- 
ence. Every  association  of  inherent  necessity  with 
secondary  causes  is  a  passage  from  physics  to  meta- 

1  Sir  John  Herschel  went  so  far  as  to  identify  gravitation  and  will  ! 
{Outlines  of  Astronomy -,  arts.  439-40).  Other  samples  of  the  same 
animistic  tendency  will  be  found  in  the  writings  of  Dr.  J.  Martineau 
and  the  late  Dr.  W.  B.  Carpenter. 


CAUSE  AND  EFFECT.   fROBABILITV.     147 

physics,  from  knowledge  to  fantasy.  Historically,  I 
think,  the  whole  association  can  be  traced  back 
through  the  old  spiritualism  to  the  sequences  of 
motion  which  the  will  as  a  first  cause  can  apparently 
enforce.  Here,  then,  it  befits  us  to  ask  two  questions: 
Does  the  will  in  any  way  really  account  for  motion  ? 
Is  there  any  ground  for  supposing  the  will  to  be  an 
arbitrary  first  cause  ? 

§  5.— Is  Will  a  First  Cause? 

Now,  in  attempting  to  answer  these  questions 
scientifically  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  what  we 
term  will  is  only  known  to  us  in  association  with 
consciousness,  and  that  we  can  only  infer  conscious- 
ness where  we  find  a  certain  type  of  nervous  system. 
Does  will  as  an  apparently  spontaneous  origin  of 
motion  throw  any  light  on  the  mystery  of  motion  ? 
Does  it  in  any  way  explain  the  particular  sequences 
motions  take  ?  To  be  consistent  we  shall  have  to 
suppose,  with  Aristotle,  that  every  phase  of  motion 
is  the  direct  product  of  a  conscious  being.  Let  us 
return  to  the  example  of  the  stone.  Apparently,  by 
the  arbitrary  action  of  my  will,  I  set  the  stone  in 
motion.  I  appear  in  doing  this  as  a  first  cause.  But 
a  complex  sequence  of  motions  now  arises.  Each 
stage  of  this  sequence  I  can  conceive  myself  mechani- 
cally describing,  but  I  am  quite  unable  to  assert  the 
necessity,  the  why  of  these  stages.  For  example,  the 
stone  falls  to  the  ground,  and  I  can  say  approxi- 
mately how  many  feet  it  will  fall  in  the  first  and  in  the 
following  seconds.  That  is  the  result  of  past  experi- 
ence used  to  predict  the  future,  the  result  of  the 
classification  of  phenomena  resumed  in  the  law  of 
gravitation  ;  but  this  law  does  not  explain  the  why 


148  THE  GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

of  the  motion.  If  I  grant  that  my  will  set  the  stone 
in  motion,  I  cannot  suppose  it  to  continue  in  motion 
for  the  same  reason,  for  any  amount  of  willing  after 
the  stone  has  left  my  hand  will  not,  in  the  majority 
of  cases,  be  in  the  least  able  to  influence  its  motion. 
Hence,  even  in  motion  started  by  a  conscious  being, 
we  have  at  once  a  mystery.  My  will  might  explain 
the  origin,  it  cannot  explain  the  continuance  of  the 
motion.  If  will  is  to  help  us  at  all,  we  must  postulate 
it  as  producing  motion  at  every  stage.  But  clearly 
this  will  is  not  my  will  ;  it  must  be  some  other  will. 
Here  we  are  only  restating  the  solutions  of  primitive 
man  with  his  spiritualism  behind  nature,  of  Schopen- 
hauer with  his  undefined  will  behind  all  phenomena, 
of  Aristotle  when  he  says  God  moves  all  things. 
But  this  solution  involves  an  extension  of  the  notion 
of  will  beyond  the  sphere  where  we  may  legitimately 
infer  its  existence.  Like  the  hypothesis  of  force  it 
postulates  an  unthinkable  x  outside  sense-impres- 
sions. It  carries  us  no-whither.  Will  cannot,  there- 
fore, be  looked  upon  as  necessitating  a  sequence  of 
motion,  any  more  than  what  we  have  termed  a 
secondary  cause,  for  in  the  great  majority  of  cases, 
if  will  be  supposed  to  start  a  motion,  it  cannot  en- 
force its  continuance  in  a  particular  sequence,  and 
so  far  as  the  will  is  concerned  the  motion  might  cease 
at  its  birth. 

§  6. —  Will  as  a  Secondary  Cause. 

Will  thus  appears,  like  the  secondary  cause,  as  a 
stage  in  the  routine  of  perceptions.  Our  experience 
shows  us  that  in  the  past  an  act  of  will  occurred  at 
a  certain  stage  in  a  routine  of  perceptions,  but  we 
cannot  assert  that  there  was  anything  in  the  act 


CAUSE  AND   EFFECT.      PROBABILITY.  149 

itself  which  enforced  the  stages  which  followed.  Does 
will,  however,  differ  on  closer  analysis  from  other 
secondary  causes  in  being  the  first  stage  of  an 
observed  routine  ?  This  leads  us  to  our  second 
question  (p.  147),  and  the  answer  to  it  is  really  in- 
volved in  the  views  on  consciousness  which  have 
been  developed  in  our  second  chapter. 

We  have  seen  that  the  difference  between  a  volun- 
tary and  involuntary  exertion  lies  in  the  latter  being 
conditioned  only  by  the  immediate  sense-impression, 
while  the  former  is  conditioned  by  stored  sense- 
impresses  and  the  conceptions  drawn  from  them. 
Where  consciousness  exists,  there  there  may  be  an 
interval  between  sense-impression  and  exertion,  this 
interval  being  filled  with  the  "  resonance,"  as  it  were, 
of  associated  but  stored  sense-impresses  and  their 
correlated  conceptions.  When  the  exertion  is  at 
once  determined  by  the  immediate  sense-impression 
(which  we  associate  with  a  construct  projected  outside 
ourselves),  we  do  not  speak  of  will,  but  of  reflex 
action,  habit,  instinct,  &c.  In  this  case  both  sense- 
impression  and  exertion  appear  as  stages  in  a  routine 
of  perceptions,  and  we  do  not  speak  of  the  exertion 
as  a  first  cause,  but  as  a  direct  effect  of  the  sense- 
impression  ;  both  are  secondary  causes  in  a  routine 
of  perceptions,  and  capable  of  mechanical  description. 
On  the  other  hand,  when  the  exertion  is  conditioned 
by  the  stored  sense-impresses,  it  appears  to  be  con- 
ditioned by  something  within  ourselves ;  by  the 
manner  in  which  memory  and  past  thought  have 
linked  together  stored  sense-impresses  and  the  con- 
ceptions drawn  from  them.  No  other  person  can 
predict  with  absolute  certainty  what  the  exertion 
will  be,  for  the  contents  of  our  mind  are  not  objects 


150  THE  GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

to  him.  None  the  less  the  inherited  features  of  our 
brain,  its  present  physical  condition  owing  to  past 
nurture,  exercise,  and  general  health,  our  past  training 
and  experience  are  all  factors  determining  what 
sense-impresses  will  be  stored,  how  they  will  be 
associated,  and  to  what  conceptions  they  will  give 
rise.  By  this  we  are  to  understand  that,  if  we  could 
bring  into  the  sphere  of  perception  the  processes  that 
intervene  in  the  brain  between  immediate  sense- 
impression  and  conscious  exertion,  we  should  find 
them  just  as  much  routine  changes  as  what  precedes 
the  sense-impression  or  follows  the  exertion.  In  other 
words,  will,  when  we  analyze  it,  does  not  appear 
as  the  first  cause  in  a  routine  of  perceptions,  but 
merely  as  a  secondary  cause  or  intermediate  link  in 
the  chain.  The  "  freedom  of  the  will "  lies  in  the  fact 
that  exertion  is  conditioned  by  our  own  individuality, 
that  the  routine  of  mental  processes  which  intervenes 
between  sense-impression  and  exertion  is  perceived 
objectively  neither  by  us  nor  by  any  one  else,  and 
psychically  by  us  alone.  Thus  will  as  the  first  cause 
of  a  sequence  of  motions  explains  nothing  at  all ;  it 
is  only  a  limit  at  which  very  often  our  power  of 
describing  a  sequence  abruptly  terminates. 

So  much  is  this  recognized  by  modern  science, 
that  special  branches  of  it  are  entirely  devoted  to  de- 
scribing the  sequences  of  secondary  causes,  the  routine 
which  precedes  special  determinations  of  the  will. 
Science  tries  to  describe  how  will  is  influenced  by 
desires  and  passions,  and  how  these  again  flow  from 
education,  experience,  inheritance,  physique,  disease, 
all  of  which  are  further  associated  with  climate,  class, 
race,  or  other  great  factors  of  evolution.  Thus,  with 
the  advance  of  our  positive  knowledge,  we  come 


CAUSE   AND   EFFECT.      PROBABILITY.  !$! 

more  and  more  to  regard  individual  acts  of  will  as 
secondary  causes  in  a  long  sequence,  as  stages  in  a 
routine  which  can  be  described — stages,  however, 
at  which  the  routine  changes  its  at  present  knowable 
side  from  the  psychical  to  the  physical.  An  act  of  will 
thus  appears  as  a  secondary  cause,  and  no  longer  as 
an  arbitrary  first  cause.  Evil  acts  flow  indeed  from 
an  anti-social  will,  and  as  hostile  to  itself  society 
endeavours  to  repress  them  ;  but  the  anti-social  will 
itself  is  seen  as  a  heritage  from  a  bad  stock,  or  as 
arising  from  the  conditions  of  past  life  and  training. 
Society  begins  more  and  more  to  regard  incorrigible 
criminals  as  insane,  and  slight  offenders  as  uneducated 
children. 

§  7. — First  Causes  have  no  Existence  for  Science. 

We  have  now  reached  some  very  important  con- 
clusions with  regard  to  will  as  a  cause.  In  the  first 
place,  the  only  will  known  to  us  (or  the  only  like  will 
that  we  can  logically  infer  to  exist)  is  seen  not  to  be 
associated  with  an  arbitrary  power  to  originate,  alter, 
or  stop  a  motion.  It  appears  merely  as  a  secondary 
cause,  as  a  stage  in  a  routine,  but  one  where  the 
knowable  side  of  the  routine  changes  from  the 
psychical  to  the  physical.  Further,  there  lies  in  this 
will  no  power  of  enforcing  a  sequence  of  motions. 
The  will  as  first  cause  is  merely  a  limit  arising  from 
some  impossibility  in  our  powers  of  further  following 
the  physical  side  of  a  routine,  or  of  discovering  its 
further  psychical  side  ;  it  is  merely  another  way  of 
saying :  At  this  point  our  ignorance  begins.  The 
moment  the  only  will  we  know  or  infer  ceases  to 
appear  as  the  arbitrary  originator  or  enforcer  of  a 
sequence,  so  soon  as  it  sinks  to  a  stage — if  a  re- 


152  THE   GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

markable  stage — in  a  routine,  then  it  becomes  idle  to 
suppose  will  as  the  backbone  of  natural  phenomena. 
Will,  as  the  creator  and  maintainer  of  nature,  is 
either  an  old  name  used  for  some  unknown  and  un- 
thinkable existence,  or  if  used  in  the  only  sense  now 
intelligible  to  us,  that  of  a  secondary  cause  or  stage  in 
a  routine,  it  gives  us  no  assistance  in  comprehending 
routine.  We  are  just  as  wise  if  we  drop  this  will 
behind  phenomena,  and  content  ourselves  with  ob- 
serving that  there  is  a  routine  in  perceptions.  This, 
in  fact,  is  what  science  does,  not  unnecessarily  multi- 
plying causes,  when  no  simplification  of  perceptions 
arises  from  postulating  their  existence. 

We  have  seen  that  the  conception  of  will  as  an 
arbitrary  source  of  motion  arose  historically,  and  not 
unnaturally,  from  a  portion  of  the  routine  of  which 
will  is  a  stage  being  both  physically  and  psychically 
screened  from  the  observer,  owing  to  its  being  buried  in 
the  individuality  of  another  person.  We  have  further 
noticed  that  as  will  and  motion  are  more  carefully 
analyzed,  the  conception  that  will  originates  motion 
ceases  to  have  any  consistency.  But  with  will  as 
first  cause  falls  to  the  ground  any  possible  experience 
of  first  causes  on  our  part.  We  can  no  longer  infer 
even  the  possibility  of  the  existence  of  first  causes,  for 
there  is  nothing  like  them  in  our  experience,  and  we 
cannot  by  the  second  canon  of  logical  inference  (p.  72) 
pass  from  the  known  to  something  totally  unlike  it  in 
the  unknown.  Science  knows  nothing  of  first  causes. 
They  cannot,  as  Stanley  Jevons  has  supposed,1  be 
inferred  from  any  branch  of  scientific  investigation,  and 

1  In  the  remarkably  unscientific  chapter  entitled,  "  Reflections  on 
the  Results  and  Limits  of  Scientific  Method,"  with  which  his,  in  so 
many  respects,  excellent  Principles  of  Science  concludes. 


CAUSE  AND   EFFECT.      PROBABILITY.  153 

where  we  see  them  asserted  we  may  be  quite  sure 
they  mark  a  permanent  or  temporary  limit  to  know- 
ledge. We  are  either  inferring  something  in  the 
beyond  of  sense-impression,  where  knowledge  and 
inference  are  meaningless  words,  or  we  are  implying 
ignorance  within  the  sphere  of  knowledge,1  in  which 
case  it  is  more  honest  to  say :  "  Here,  for  the  present, 
our  ignorance  begins,"  than,  "  Here  is  a  first  cause." 

§  8. — Cause  and  Effect  as  the  Routine  of  Experience. 
We  are  now  in  a  position,  I  think,  to  appreciate 
the  scientific  value  of  the  word  cause.  Scientifically, 
cause,  as  originating  or  enforcing  a  particular  se- 
quence of  perceptions,  is  meaningless — we  have  no 
experience  of  anything  which  originates  or  enforces 
something  else.  Cause,  however,  used  to  mark  a  stage 
in  a  routine,  is  a  clear  and  valuable  conception,  which 
throws  the  idea  of  cause  entirely  into  the  field  of 
sense-impressions,  into  the  sphere  where  we  can  reason 
and  reach  knowledge.  Cause,  in  this  sense,  is  a  stage 
in  a  routine  of  experience,  and  not  one  in  a  routine  of 
inherent  necessity.  The  distinction  is,  perhaps,  a  diffi- 
cult one,  but  it  is  all  the  more  needful  that  the  reader 
should  fully  grasp  it.  If  I  write  down  a  hundred 
numbers  at  chance — say  by  opening  carelessly  the 

1  The  latter  alternative — the  temporary  limit  to  ignorance — has  been 
the  chief  source  of  "  first  causes."  So  long  as  the  routine  of  history 
cannot  be  traced  back  more  than  a  few  centuries,  we  find  no  difficulty 
in  asserting  that  the  world  began  6,000  years  ago.  So  long  as  we  do  not 
grasp  the  evolution  of  life  from  its  most  primitive  types,  we  postulate  a 
first  cause  creating  each  type  (Paley).  So  long  as  we  do  not  observe 
the  various  grades  of  animal  intelligence  and  consciousness,  we  suppose 
a  soul  implanted  in  every  human  being  at  birth.  So  long  as  we  do  not 
see  that  the  mutual  motion  of  two  atoms  is  as  mysterious  as  the  life 
changes  of  a  cell,  we  postulate  a  total  difference  between  the  two  kinds 
of  motion  and  a  separate  creation  of  life. 


154  THE  GRAMMAR   OF  SCIENCE. 

pages  of  a  book — there  results  a  sequence  of  numbers 
beginning,  say — 

141,  253,  73,  477,  !87>  5^5,  57,  353  •••  &e., 
in  which  I  cannot  predict  from  any  two  or  three  or 
more  numbers  those  which  will  follow.  The  number 
477  does  not  enable  me  to  say  that  187  will  follow  it, 
the  numbers  which  precede  187  in  no  way  enforce  or 
determine  those  which  follow  it.  On  the  other  hand, 
if  I  take  the  series — 

i,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8  ... 

each  individual  number  leads  (by  addition  of  i)  to 
the  immediately  following  number,  or  in  a  certain 
sense  determines  it.  The  first  series  can,  however,  be 
written  down  so  often  that  we  learn  it  by  rote,  that  it 
becomes  a  routine  of  experience.  The  analogy  must 
not,  of  course,  be  pressed  far,  but  it  may  still  be  of 
service.  There  is  nothing  in  any  scientific  cause 
which  compels  us  of  inherent  necessity  to  predict  the 
effect.  The  effect  is  associated  with  the  caise  simply 
as  a  result  of  past  direct  or  indirect  experience.  Or 
again,  perhaps  the  matter  may  be  grasped  more 
clearly  from  a  geometrical  analogy.  If  I  form  the 
conception  of  a  circle,  it  follows  of  inherent  necessity 
that  the  angle  at  the  circumference  on  any  diameter 
is  a  right-angle.  The  one  conception  flows  not  as 
a  result  of  experience  but  as  a  logical  necessity 
from  the  other.  No  sequence  of  sense-impressions 
involves  in  itself  a  logical  necessity.  The  sequence 
might  be  chaotic  like  our  first  series  of  numbers  ;  it 
has  become  for  us  a  routine  by  repeated  experience. 
The  noteworthy  fact  in  a  routine  of  perceptions  lies 
not  so  much  in  the  particular  order  of  the  stages  in 
the  sequence,  as  in  the  result  of  experience  that  this 
order  can  exactly  repeat  itself. 


CAUSE  AND   EFFECT.      PROBABILITY.  155 

The  reader  may  perhaps  wonder  how,  if  the  se- 
quences of  sense-impressions  are  really  of  the  chaotic 
nature  represented  by  our  first  series  of  numbers,  it  is 
possible  to  describe  such  sequences  apart  from  their 
repetition  by  those  brief  formulae  we  term  scientific 
laws.  As  the  perceptive  faculty  presents  us,  indeed, 
with  the  sequence,  it  is  undeniably  more  like  the 
second  than  the  first  series  of  numbers,  for  natural 
phenomena  can  without  doubt  be  largely  described 
by  certain  brief  laws.  We  must  rather  put  the  actual 
case  in  the  following  form.  We  observe  a  person 
whose  motives  are  quite  unknown  to  us  writing  down 
the  series — 

I,  2,  4,  8,  16,  32, 

and  at  present  he  has  reached  the  number  32.  A 
law  describing  the  series  is  obvious — each  number  is 
twice  the  preceding  one.  With  a  great  degree  of 
probability  we  infer  that  he  will  now  write  down  64, 
especially  if  we  have  seen  him  write  the  series  up  to 
and  beyond  32  before.  But  there  is  nothing  of  logical 
necessity  about  his  writing  64  after  the  preceding 
numbers.  Those  numbers,  when  we  know  the  law, 
suggest  his  doing  so,  but  do  not  enforce  it. 

We  are  now  in  a  position  to  scientifically  define 
cause.  Whenever  a  sequence  of  perceptions  D,  E,  F,  G 
is  invariably  preceded  by  the  perception  C,  or  the 
perceptions  C,  D,  E,  F,  G  always  occur  in  this 
order,  that  is,  form  a  routine  of  experience,  C  is 
said  to  be  a  cause  of  D,  E,  F,  G,  which  are  then 
described  as  its  effects.  No  phenomenon  or  stage 
in  a  sequence  has  only  one  cause,  all  antecedent 
stages  are  successive  causes,  and,  as  science  has  no 
reason  to  infer  a  first  cause,  the  succession  of  causes 
can  be  carried  back  to  the  limit  of  existing  know- 


156  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

ledge,  and  beyond  that  ad  infinitum  in  the  field  of 
conceivable  knowledge.  When  we  scientifically  state 
causes  we  are  really  describing  the  successive  stages 
of  a  routine  of  experience.  Causation,  says  John 
Stuart  Mill,  is  uniform  x  antecedence,  and  this  defini- 
tion is  perfectly  in  accord  with  the  scientific  concept, 

§  9.—  Width  of  the  Term  Cause. 

The  word  cause,  even  in  its  scientific  sense,  is 
somewhat  elastic.  It  has  been  used  to  mark  uniform 
conjunction  in  space  as  well  as  uniform  antecedence 
in  time  ;  while  if  we  take  an  actually  existing  group 
of  perceptions,  say  the  particular  ash-tree  in  my 
garden,  the  causes  of  its  growth  might  be  widened 
out  into  a  description  of  the  various  past  stages  of 
the  universe.  One  of  the  causes  of  its  growth  is  the 
existence  of  my  garden,  which  is  conditioned  by  the 
existence  of  the  metropolis  ;  another  cause  is  the 
nature  of  the  soil,  sand  approaching  the  clay  limit, 
which  again  is  conditioned  by  the  geological  structure 
and  past  history  of  the  earth.  The  causes  of  any 
individual  thing  thus  widen  out  into  the  unmanageable 
history  of  the  universe.  The  ash-tree  is  like  Tenny- 
son's "flower  in  the  crannied  wall"  :  to  know  all  its 
causes  would  be  to  know  the  universe.  To  trace 
causes  in  this  sense  is  like  tracing  back  all  the  lines 
of  ancestry  which  converge  in  one  individual  ;  we 
soon  reach  a  point  where  we  can  go  no  further  owing  to 
the  bulk  of  the  material.  Obviously  science  in  tracing 
causes  attempts  no  task  of  this  character,  but  at  the 
same  time  it  is  useful  to  remember  how  essentially 
the  causes  of  any  finite  portions  of  the  universe  lead 

1  "  Uniformity  "  and  "  sameness"  are,  in  the  perceptual  world,  how- 
ever, only  relative  terms  (see  p.  200). 


CAtJSE   AND   EFFECT.      PROBABILITY.  157 

us  irresistibly  to  the  history  of  the  universe  as  a  whole. 
This  thought  suggests  how  closely  knit  together  are 
in  reality  the  most  diverse  branches  of  our  positive 
knowledge.  It  shows  us  how  difficult  it  is  for 
the  great  building  of  science  to  advance  rapidly 
and  surely  unless  its  various  parts  keep  pace  with 
each  other  (p.  16).  Practically  science  has  to  content 
itself  with  tracing  one  line  of  ancestry,  one  range  of 
causes  at  a  time,  and  this  not  for  a  special  and  indi- 
vidual object  like  the  ash-tree  in  my  garden,  but  for 
ash-trees  or  even  trees  in  general.  It  is  because 
science  for  its  descriptive  purposes  deals  with  general 
notions  or  conceptions,  that  the  words  cause  and 
effect  have  been  withdrawn  from  the  sphere  of  sense- 
impressions,  from  phenomena  to  which  they  strictly 
belong,  and  applied  to  the  world  of  conceptions  and 
ideas,  where,  indeed,  there  is  logical  necessity  but  no 
true  cause  and  effect.  To  this  point  I  shall  return 
under  §  n. 

§  10. —  The  Universe  of  Sense-Impressions  as  a  Universe  of 
Motions. 

The  reader  can  hardly  fail  to  have  been  impressed 
in  his  past  reading  and  experience  with  the  great 
burden  of  explanation  which  is  thrown  on  that  un- 
fortunate metaphysical  conception  force.  He  will 
undoubtedly  have  heard  of  the  "  mechanical  forces" 
ruling  the  universe,  of  the  "vital  forces"  directing  the 
development  of  life,  and  of  the  "social  forces"  govern- 
ing the  growth  of  human  societies.1  He  may  perhaps 

1  A  good  illustration  of  the  obscurity  attaching  to  the  use  of  the 
words  force  and  cause  may  be  taken  from  the  recently  published 
History  of  ffitman  Marriage,  by  E.  Westermarck.  The  author 
writes  : — "Nothing  exists  without  a  cause,  but  this  cause  is  not  sought  in 
an  agglomeration  of  external  or  internal  forces."  He  thus  implies  that 
a  cause  ought  to  be  sought  in  this  unintelligible  ' '  agglomeration  of 


15$  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

have  concluded,  with  the  present  writer,  that  the 
word  is  not  infrequently  a  fetish  which  symbolizes 
more  or  less  mental  obscurity.  But  the  reason  for 
the  repeated  occurrence  of  the  word  is  really  not  far 
to  seek.  Wherever  motion,  change,  growth,  were 
postulated,  there  in  the  old  metaphysics  force  as  the 
cause  of  motion  was  to  be  found.  The  frequent  use 
of  the  word  force  was  due  to  the  almost  invariable 
association  of  motion  with  our  perceptions,  or,  in 
more  accurate  language,  to  the  analysis  of  nearly 
all  our  sense-impressions  by  aid  of  conceptual 
motions.  For  example,  a  coal  fire  may  be  said 
to  be  a  cause  of  warmth.  Here  we  mean 
that  the  group  of  sense-impressions  we  term  coal, 
followed  by  the  group  we  term  combustion,  has 
invariably  in  our  experience  been  accompanied  by 
the  sense-impression  warmth.  We  may,  if  we  are 
chemists,  be  able  to  describe  the  chemical  processes, 
the  atomic  changes  or  motions  to  which  the  pheno- 
menon of  combustion  has  been  reduced  ;  we  may, 
if  we  are  physicists,  describe  the  motion  of  the 
ethereal  medium,  to  which  the  phenomenon  of 
radiation  of  heat  has  been  reduced  ;  we  may,  if  we 
are  physiologists,  be  able  to  describe  the  nerve- 
motions  by  aid  of  which  the  molecular  motion  of  the 
finger-tips  is  interpreted  as  the  sense-impression 
warmth  at  the  brain.  In  all  these  cases  we  are 
dealing  with  the  sequences  of  various  types  of  motion, 
into  which  we  analyze  or  reduce  a  variety  of  sense- 
external  and  internal  forces."  Now,  what  the  author  attempts  to  do  is  to 
describe  the  various  stages  through  which  marriage  has  passed,  and  then 
to  express  the  sequence  of  these  stages  by  brief  formulae,  such  as  those 
of  natural  selection.  To  use  the  \vordforce  hopelessly  obscures  his 
method. 


CAUSE  AND   EFFECT.      PROBABILITY.  159 

impressions.  Just  as  in  the  special  case  of  gravi- 
tation, we  can  also  describe  these  sequences  and  can 
frequently  give  a  measure  to  the  motions  which  we 
conceive  to  take  place,  but  we  are  still  wholly  unable 
to  state  why  these  motions  occur.  We  may  talk, 
if  we  please,  about  the  forces  of  combustion,  the 
forces  of  radiation,  or  even  the  forces  inherent 
in  nerve  substance  ;  we  might  indeed  say  that 
the  warmth,  of  which  combustion  is  the  cause,  is 
due  to  "an  agglomeration  of  internal  and  ex- 
ternal forces,"  but  in  using  these  phrases  we  do  not 
introduce  an  iota  of  new  knowledge,  but  too  often 
a  mountain  of  obscurity.  We  hide  the  fact  that 
all  knowledge  is  concise  description,  all  cause  is 
routine. 

Now,  it  deserves  special  note  that  the  sequences 
with  which  we  are  dealing  are  all  reducible  to  de- 
scriptions of  motion, -or  of  change.  We  need  not 
start  arbitrarily  with  the  combustion  of  the  coal ;  its 
chemical  constitution  as  an  element  in  the  sequence 
of  causes  can,  for  example,  be  carried  back  through 
a  long  past  history  in  the  evolution  of  coal,  and  we 
cannot  logically  infer  (p.  151)  any  beginning  or  first 
cause  in  this  sequence.  Sequences  of  motion  or  of 
change  in  natural  phenomena  go  backwards  and 
forwards  through  an  infinite  range  of  causes,  and  to 
begin  or  end  them  anywhere  with  a  first  or  last  cause 
is  simply  to  say  that  at  such  a  point  the  sphere  of 
knowledge  ends  with  an  unthinkable  x.  The  universe 
thus  appears  to  the  scientist  as  a  universe  of  motion, 
motion  the  why  of  which  is  unknown,  but  the 
sequences  of  which  are,  according  to  our  experience, 
invariably  repeating  themselves.  The  cause  of  motion 
in  the  scientific  sense  lying  in  the  sphere  of  sense- 


i6o  THE   GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

impressions r  cannot  be  the  why  of  motions,  we  must 
seek  it  in  some  uniform  antecedent  of  the  motion — such, 
for  example,  as  the  past  history  of  the  motion,  the 
relative  position  of  the  moving  bodies,  and  so  forth. 
How  such  antecedents  are  true  scientific  causes  of 
motion  we  shall  see  in  our  Chapter  VIII.  devoted  to 
the  "  Laws  of  Motion." 

§  II. — Necessity  belongs  to  the  World  of  Conceptions >  not  to  that 
of  Perceptions. 

At  this  point  the  reader  may  feel  inclined  to  say : 
"  But  surely  there  is  as  much  necessity  that  a  planet 
describing  its  elliptic  orbit  should  at  a  certain  time 
be  in  a  certain  position,  as  that  the  angles  on  the 
diameter  of  a  circle  should  be  right-angles?"  With 
this  I  entirely  agree.  The  theory  of  planetary  motion 
is  in  itself  as  logically  necessary  as  the  theory  of  the 
circle ;  but  in  both  cases  the  logic  and  necessity  arise 
from  the  definitions  and  axioms  with  which  we 
mentally  start,  and  do  not  exist  in  the  sequence  of 
sense-impressions  which  we  hope  that  they  will,  at 
any  rate  approximately,  describe.  The  necessity  lies 
in  the  world  of  conceptions,  and  is  only  unconsciously 
and  illogically  transferred  to  the  world  of  perceptions. 

This  difference  may  be  well  illustrated  by  an 
example  due  to  Mr.  James  Stuart,  formerly  Professor 
of  Mechanism  in  Cambridge.  Suppose  I  were  to  put 
a  stone  on  a  piece  of  flat  ground  and  walk  round  it 
in  that  particular  curve  termed  an  ellipse,  which  a 
planet  describes  about  the  sun.  We  will  further 
suppose  the  stone  to  be  at  that  particular  point 

1  That  the  frequently  cited  "muscular  sensation  of  force"  is  really 
only  a  sense-impression  interpreted  as  one  of  motion  will  be  shown  at  a 
later  stage  of  our  work. 


CAUSE   AND   EFFECT.      PROBABILITY.  l6l 

termed  the  focus  which  in  the  case  of  an  elliptic 
orbit  is  actually  occupied  by  the  sun  ;  and  lastly,  I 
will  walk  round  so  that  a  line  drawn  from  the  stone 
to  me  sweeps  out  equal  areas  in  equal  times,  a  funda- 
mental characteristic  of  the  laws  of  planetary  motion. 
Now  my  motion  might  be  very  fairly  described  by  the 
law  of  gravitation,  but  it  is  quite  clear  that  no  force 
from  the  stone  to  me,  no  law  of  gravitation, 
could  logically  be  said  to  cause  my  motion  in  the 
ellipse.  We  might  in  imagination  conceive  a  point 
changing  its  motion  according  to  the  law  of  gravi- 
tation and  tracing  out  my  ellipse  ;  it  might  keep 
pace  with  me,  and  would,  of  logical  necessity, 
cover  equal  areas  in  equal  times.  This  logical 
necessity  would  flow  from  our  definition,  our  con- 
ception, namely,  that  of  a  gravitating  point.  This 
point  might  be  used  to  describe  my  elliptic  motion, 
and  to  predict  my  positions  in  the  future,  but  no 
observer  would  be  logical  in  inferring  that  the 
necessary  sequence  of  positions  involved  in  the 
concept  of  a  gravitating  point  could  be  transferred, 
or  projected  into  a  necessity  in  the  sequence  of  his 
perceptions  of  my  motion.  I  might  go  round  the 
ellipse  a  hundred  times  in  the  same  manner  and  then 
stop  or  go  off  in  an  entirely  different  path.  The  sole 
legitimate  inference  of  the  observer  would  then  be 
that  the  law  of  gravitation  was  not  a  sufficiently  wide- 
embracing  formula  to  describe  more  than  a  portion 
of  my  motion.1  This  difference  between  necessity  in 

1  The  example  cited  is  given  by  Mr.  Stuart  on  p.  168  of  his 
A  Chapter  of  Science.  It  is  there  used  to  support  the  argument  of 
primitive  man ;  my  will  causes  me  to  go  round  the  ellipse,  there- 
fore will  causes  the  planets  to  go  round  in  ellipses,  and  hence  Mr. 
Stuart  passes  to  Aristotle's  God  as  continual  mover  of  all  things. 
That  will  is  only  found  associated  with  certain  types  of  material  nervous 

12 


162  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

conception  and  routine  in  perception  ought  to  be 
carefully  borne  in  mind.  The  corpuscular,  the  elastic- 
solid,  and  the  electro-magnetic  theories  of  light  all 
involve  a  series  of  conclusions  of  logical  necessity,  and 
we  may  use  these  conclusions  as  a  means  of  testing  our 
perceptions.  So  far  as  they  are  confirmed,  the  theory 
remains  valid  as  a  description  ;  if,  on  the  other  hand, 
our  sense-impressions  differ  from  these  conclusions, 
the  conclusions  have  just  as  much  mental  necessity, 
but  the  theory  while  valid  for  the  mind  is  not  valid 
as  a  description  of  the  routine  of  perceptions.  It  is 
only  the  very  great  probability  deduced  from  past 
experience  of  routine  that  enables  us  to  speak  of  the 
"  invariable  order  of  the  universe,"  or  scientists  to 
assert  that  facts  which  have  hitherto  proved  obstinate 
will  be  ultimately  embraced  by  well-established 
laws  of  nature.  Not  in  the  field  of  causation,  but  in 
that  of  conception  do  we  deal  with  certainties. 


§  12.— Routine  in  Perception  is  a  necessary  condition  of 
Knowledge. 

While  in  the  nature  of  perceptions  themselves 
there  appears  nothing  tending  to  enforce  an  order 
D,  E,  F,  G  rather  than  F,  G,  D,  E,  there  is  still  a  real 
need,  if  thought  is  to  be  possible,  that  the  perceptive 

systems  is  not  used  by  Mr.  Stuart,  however,  to  logically  infer  the 
material  nature  of  his  first  cause.  He  passes  by  the  juggle  of  a 
common  name  from  the  known  to  the  unthinkable  outside  the  sphere 
of  knowledge  and  science.  The  real  truth  which  his  Chapter  of  Science 
contains  as  to  the  characteristics  of  natural  law  is  hopelessly  vitiated  by 
his  theological  standpoint.  "  I  know,"  he  says,  "no  result  of  science 
which  could  go  to  discredit  any  single  thing  in  all  the  Bible"  (p.  184). 
Mr.  Stuart's  '  science'  is  thus  incomparably  more  retrograde  than  the 
modern  Cambridge  theology  which  discredits  Noah's  Ark. 


CAUSE  AND   EFFECT.      PROBABILITY.  163 

faculty  should  always  repeat  the  sequence  in  the 
same  order.  In  other  words,  repetition  or  routine  is 
an  essential  condition  of  thought ;  the  actual  order 
of  the  sequence  is  immaterial,  but  whatever  it  may 
be,  it  must  repeat  itself  if  knowledge  is  to  be 
possible.  We  express  this  briefly  in  the  law :  That 
the  same  (p.  200)  set  of  causes  is  always  accompanied  by 
the  same  effect.  That  the  future  will  be  like  our  ex- 
perience of  the  past  is  the  sole  condition  under  which 
we  can  predict  what  is  about  to  happen  and  so  guide 
our  conduct.  But  thought  has  been  evolved  in  the 
struggle  for  existence  as  a  guide  to  conduct,  and 
therefore  could  not  have  been  evolved  had  this  con- 
dition been  absent.  If  after  the  sense-impressions 
D,  E,  F,  G,  the  sense-impression  H  does  not 
uniformly  follow,  but  A,  J,  or  even  Z,  occur  equally 
often,  then  knowledge  becomes  impossible  for  us, 
and  we  must  cease  to  think.  The  power  of  thinking, 
— or  of  associating  groups  and  sequences  of  sense- 
impressions,  immediate  or  stored, — vanishes  if  these 
groups  and  sequences  have  no  permanent  elements 
by  which  they  can  be  classified  and  compared. 

In  the  struggle  for  existence  man  has  won  his 
dictatorship  over  other  forms  of  life  by  his  power  of 
foreseeing  the  effects  which  flow  from  antecedent 
causes — not  only  by  his  memory  of  past  experience, 
but  by  his  power  of  codifying  natural  law,  that  is, 
by  his  power  of  generalizing  experience  in  scientific 
statements.  It  was  not  necessary  for  his  success  that 
he  should  know  why  phenomena  take  place,  but  only 
that  he  should  know  how  they  take  place,  that  he 
should  be  able  to  observe  in  them  a  routine,  a 
repeated  sequence  as  a  basis  for  his  knowledge.  We 
have  only  to  consider  in  some  simple  case — say  that 


164  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

of  the  combustion  of  coal — what  would  follow  for  man 
if  the  resulting  sense-impression  were  not  uniform — 
if  it  were,  for  example,  either  intense  warmth  or 
intense  cold — to  appreciate  that  invariable  order  in 
the  sequence  of  sense-impressions  is  an  absolute  con- 
dition for  man's  knowledge,  and  therefore  for  the 
foresight  by  aid  of  which  he  has  won  his  dictatorship. 
In  the  chaos  of  sensations,  in  the  "  beyond  "  of  sense- 
impressions,  we  cannot  infer  necessity,  order  or 
routine,  for  these  are  concepts  formed  by  the  mind 
of  man  on  this  side  of  sense-impressions.  Yet  if  the 
supremacy  of  man  is  due  to  his  reasoning  faculty,  so 
the  condition  for  the  existence  of  man  as  a  reasoning 
being  is  routine  in  his  perceptions,  invariable  order 
in  the  sequences  of  his  sense -impressions.  We  can 
neither  assert  nor  deny  that  this  routine  is  due  to 
something  beyond  sense-impression,  for  in  that 
"  beyond  "  the  word  routine  is  meaningless,  and  we  can 
neither  assert  nor  deny  where  we  are  dealing  with  a 
field  to  which  the  word  knowledge  cannot  be  applied. 
All  we  can  assert  is  that  the  reasoning  faculty  in  man 
connotes  a  perceptive  faculty  presenting  sense-im- 
pressions in  the  same  invariable  order.  That  this 
routine  is  due  to  the  nature  of  the  perceptive  faculty 
itself — to  factors,  of  which  we  are  unconscious  in  its 
constitution,  akin  to  the  conscious  association  and 
memory  of  the  reasoning  faculty — is  a  plausible  if 
unproven  hypothesis.  It  is  one,  however,  as  we  have 
seen,  suggested  by  the  contemporaneous  growth  of 
perception  and  reason,  and  strengthened  by  the 
impossibility  of  any  form  of  perceptive  faculty,  such 
as  we  find  in  the  insane,  surviving  in  the  struggle  for 
existence  (p.  125). 

While  invariable  order  in  the  sequence  of  sense- 


CAUSE  AND   EFFECT.      PROBABILITY.  165 

impressions  is  thus  seen  to  be  an  essential  character- 
istic of  the  perceptive  faculty  of  a  rational  being,  the 
power  to  understand  the  why  and  wherefore  of  any 
sequence  is  not  so.  It  would  undoubtedly  be  of  great 
intellectual  interest  to  know  why  bodies  fall  to  the 
earth,  but  how  they  invariably  fall  is  the  practical 
knowledge,  which  now  enables  us  to  build  machines 
and  which  enabled  our  forefathers  to  throw  stones, 
and  thus  helped  them  as  it  helps  us  in  the  struggle 
for  existence.  Broadly  speaking,  here  as  elsewhere, 
the  perceptive  faculty  has  developed  along  lines 
which  strengthen  man's  powers  of  self-preservation 
and  not  along  those  which  would  merely  minister  to 
his  intellectual  curiosity. 

Anything,  be  it  noted,  that  tends  to  weaken  our 
confidence  in  the  uniform  order  of  phenomena,  in 
what  we  have  termed  the  routine  of  perceptions, 
tends  also  to  stultify  our  reasoning  faculty  by 
destroying  the  sole  basis  of  knowledge.  It  decreases 
our  power  of  foresight  and  lessens  our  strength  in 
the  battle  of  life.  For  this  reason  theosophists  and 
spiritualists  with  their  modern  miracles  contradicting 
the  long-experienced  routine  of  perceptions  are  very 
unlikely  to  form  a  society  sufficiently  stable  to 
survive  in  the  struggle  for  existence.  Every  ecstatic 
and  mystical  state  weakens  the  whole  intellectual 
character  of  those  who  experience  it,  for  it  impairs 
their  belief  in  the  normal  routine  of  perceptions. 
The  abnormal  perceptive  faculty,  whether  that  of  the 
madman  or  that  of  the  mystic,  must  ever  be  a 
danger  to  human  society,  for  it  undermines  the 
efficiency  of  the  reason  as  a  guide  to  conduct. 
Conviction,  therefore,  of  the  uniform  order  of 
phenomena  is  essential  to  social  welfare. 


l66  ±HE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

But  the  reader  may  object  that  although  this  convic- 
tion be  essential  to  social  welfare,  it  does  not  follow 
that  it  is  well  based.  Belief  in  a  fetish  may  be 
essential  to  the  welfare  of  a  primitive  tribe,  and  he 
who  does  not  believe  in  it  may  be  exterminated  ;  yet 
this  does  not  demonstrate  the  rational  character  of 
the  belief.  It  is  right  therefore  that  we  should 
investigate  whether  our  conviction  is  well  based,  and 
to  this  point  we  shall  devote  the  remaining  sections 
of  this  chapter. 

In  concluding  the  present  section  we  may  resume 
the  results  reached  as  follows  : — 

In  the  order  of  perceptions  (cause  and  effect)  no 
inherent  necessity  can  be  demonstrated. 

In  the  uniformity  with  which  sequences  of  percep- 
tions are  repeated  (the  routine  of  perceptions)  there 
is  also  no  inherent  necessity,  but  it  is  a  necessary 
condition  for  the  existence  of  thinking  beings  that 
there  should  be  a  routine  in  perceptions.  The 
necessity  thus  lies  in  the  nature  of  the  thinking  being 
and  not  in  the  perceptions  themselves  ;  thus  it  is 
conceivably  a  product  of  the  perceptive  faculty. 


§  1 3 . — Probable  and  Provable. 

Stanley  Jevons  in  his  discussion  of  the  theory  of 
probability,  which  forms  one  of  the  most  valuable 
and  interesting  portions  of  his  Principles  of  Science, 
remarks  that  the  etymology  of  the  word  probable 
does  not  help  us  to  understand  what  probability  is 
and  where  it  exists  : — 

"  For,  curiously  enough,  probable  is  ultimately  the 
same  word  as  provable — a  good  instance  of  one  word 


CAUSE  AND   EFFECT.      PROBABILITY.  l6/ 

becoming  differentiated  to  two  opposite  meanings  " 
(p.  197).* 

Now  we  have  seen  that  certainty  belongs  only  to 
the  sphere  of  conceptions  ;  that  inherent  necessity  has 
a  meaning  in  the  mental  field  of  logic,  but  that  we  can- 
not postulate  it  in  the  universe  of  perceptions ;  that 
the  "  necessity  of  natural  law  "  is  really  an  unjustifi- 
able phrase.  The  word  proof,  therefore,  used  in  the 
sense  of  a  demonstrable  certainty  applies  only  to 
the  sphere  of  conceptions.  What  are  we  then  to 
understand  when  the  word  proof  is  applied  to  natural 
phenomena  ?  Shall  we  say  that  it  is  incorrect  to  use 
the  word  prove  at  all  in  such  relationship  ?  Yet  our 
leading  men  of  science  do  use  it.  Here  is  a  passage 
from  Sir  William  Thomson's  lecture  on  "The  Six 
Gateways  of  Knowledge." 2  He  is  discussing  the 
possibility  of  our  having  a  "  magnetic  sense,"  and  he 
writes : — 

"  I  cannot  think  that  that  quality  of  matter  in 
space — magnetization — which  produces  such  a  pro- 
digious effect  upon  a  piece  of  metal,  can  be  absolutely 
without  any — it  is  certainly  not  without  any — effect 
whatever  on  the  matter  of  a  living  body ;  and  that 
it  can  be  absolutely  without  any  perceptible  effect 
whatever  on  the  matter  of  a  living  body  placed  there, 
seems  to  me  not  proved  even  yet,  although  nothing 
has  been  found." 

The  word  prove  is  here  distinctly  used  of  some- 
thing being  demonstrable  in  the  field  of  perception. 

1  The  source  of  both  words  must  be  sought,  I  think,  in  the  mediaeval 
Latin  proba,  a  sample,  test,  or  trial.  Thus  probare  is  used  in  the  sense 
of  extracting  a  fact  by  torture,  and  probabilis  is  that  which  by  aid  of  the 
proba  has  been  attested  and  approved. 

3  Popular  Lectures  and  Addresses,  vol.  i.  p.  261.    London,  1889. 


1 68  THE   GRAMMAR   OP^   SCIENCE. 

There  is  clearly  an  inference  involved,  and  this 
inference  is  easily  seen  to  be  that  of  the  routine  of 
perceptions,  namely,  that  if  something  has  once  been 
perceived,  it  will  under  precisely  the  same  circum- 
stances be  again  perceived.  Our  conviction  of  this 
routine  is  not  a  certainty,  but,  as  we  have  seen,  a 
probability.  Hence,  when  we  are  speaking  of  the 
sphere  of  perceptions  we  must  remember  that 
provable  is  ultimately  the  same  word  as  probable. 
The  association  of  the  two  words  does  not  therefore 
seem  without  profit  ;  and  the  etymology  may  after  all 
serve  to  remind  us  of  the  character  of  our  knowledge 
in  the  field  of  perception. 

The  problem  before  us  is  the  following  one  :  A 
certain  order  of  perceptions  has  been  experienced  in 
the  past,  what  is  the  probability  that  the  perceptions 
will  repeat  themselves  in  the  same  order  in  the 
future?  The  probability  is  conditioned  by  two 
factors,  namely:  (i)  In  most  cases  the  order  has 
previously  been  very  often  repeated,  and  (2)  past 
experience  shows  us  that  sequences  of  perceptions 
are  things  which  have  hitherto  repeated  themselves 
without  fail.  Thus  there  is  past  experience  of  repeti- 
tion in  the  class,  as  well  as  in  the  individual, 
strengthening  the  probability  of  a  future  recurrence 
of  the  same  order.  The  probability  that  the  sun  will 
rise  to-morrow  is  not  only  conditioned  by  men's  past 
experience  of  the  sun's  motion,  but  by  their  past 
experience  of  the  uniform  order  in  natural  pheno- 
mena. There  is  no  need  to  repeat  a  cautiously 
conducted  experiment  a  great  number  of  times  to 
prove — that  is,  to  establish  an  overwhelming  pro- 
bability in  favour  of — a  certain  sequence  of  percep- 
tions. The  overwhelming  probability  drawn  from 


CAUSE  AND  EFFECT.      PROBABILITY.  169 

past  experience  in  favour  of  all  sequences  repeating 
themselves  at  once  embraces  the  new  sequence. 
Suppose  the  solidification  of  hydrogen  to  have  been 
once  accomplished  by  an  experimenter  of  known 
probity  and  caution,  and  with  a  method  in  which 
criticism  fails  to  detect  any  flaw.  What  is  the 
probability  that  on  repetition  of  the  same  process 
the  solidification  of  hydrogen  will  follow?  Now 
Laplace  has  asserted  that  the  probability  that  an  event 
which  has  occurred  p  times  and  has  not  hitherto 
failed,  will  occur  again  is  represented  by  the  fraction 
£&  Hence  in  the  case  of  hydrogen,  the  probability 
of  repetition  would  only  be  f ,  or,  as  we  popularly  say, 
the  odds  would  be  two  to  one  in  its  favour.  On  the 
other  hand,  if  the  sun  has  risen  without  fail  a  million 
times,  the  odds  in  favour  of  its  rising  to-morrow 
would  be  1,000,001  to  i.  It  is  clear  that  on  this 
hypothesis  there  would  be  practical  certainty  with 
regard  to  the  rising  of  the  sun  being  repeated,  but 
only  some  likelihood  with  regard  to  the  solidification 
of  hydrogen  being  repeated.  The  numbers,  in  fact, 
do  not  in  the  least  represent  the  degrees  of  belief  of 
the  scientist  regarding  the  repetition  of  the  two 
phenomena.  We  ought  rather  to  put  the  problem 
in  this  manner :  /  different  sequences  of  perception 
have  been  found  to  follow  the  same  routine  however 
often  repeated,  and  none  have  been  found  to  fail, 
what  is  the  probability  that  the  (/)+i)th  sequence 
of  perceptions  will  have  a  routine?  Laplace's 
theorem  shows  us  that  the  odds  are  (p+i)  to  I  in 
favour  of  the  new  sequence  having  a  routine.  In  other 
words,  since  /  represents  here  the  infinite  variety  of 
phenomena  in  which  men's  past  experience  has 
shown  that  the  same  causes  are  on  repetition  followed 


THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

by  the  same  effect,  there  are  overwhelming  odds  that 
any  newly  observed  phenomena  may  be  classified 
under  this  law  of  causation.1  So  great  and,  consider- 
ing the  odds,  reasonably  great  is  our  belief  in  this 
law  of  causation  applying  to  new  phenomena,  that 
when  a  sequence  of  perceptions  does  not  appear  to 
repeat  itself,  we  assert  with  the  utmost  confidence  that 
the  same  causes  have  not  been  present  in  the  original 
and  in  the  repeated  sequence. 

§  14. — Probability  as  to  Breaches  in  the  Routine  of  Perceptions. 

Laplace  has  even  enabled  us  to  take  account  of 
possible  "  miracles,"  anomies,  or  breaches  of  routine  in 
the  sequence  of  perceptions.  He  tells  us  that  if  an 
event  has  happened  /  times  and  failed  q  times,  then 
the  probability  that  it  will  happen  the  next  time  is 
or  the  odds  in  favour  of  its  happening  are 
o^+i.  Now  if  we  are  as  generous  as  we 
possibly  can  be  to  the  reporters  of  the  miraculous,  we 
can  hardly  assert  that  a  well-authenticated  breach 
of  the  routine  of  perceptions  has  happened  once  in 
past  experience  for  every  1,000  million  cases  of 
routine.  In  other  words  we  must  take  p  equal  to 
1,000  million  times  <?,  or  the  odds  against  a  miracle 
happening  in  the  next  sequence  of  perceptions  would 
be  about  1,000  millions  to  one.  It  is  clear  from  this 
that  any  belief  that  the  miraculous  will  occur  in  our 
immediate  experience  cannot  possibly  form  a  factor 
in  the  conduct  of  practical  life.  Indeed  the  odds 
against  a  miracle  occurring  are  so  great,  the  per- 
centage of  permanently  diseased  or  temporarily  dis- 

1  A  somewhat  greater  probability  in  favour  of  a  new  sequence  which 
has  repeated  itself  r  times,  repeating  itself  on  the  (^+i)th  trial  will 
be  given  below. 


CAUSE  AND   EFFECT.      PROBABILITY.  t;i 

ordered  perceptive  faculties  so  large  as  compared  with 
the  percentage  of  asserted  breaches  of  routine,  and 
the  advantage  to  mankind  of  evolving  an  absolutely 
certain  basis  of  knowledge  so  great,1  that  we  are 
justified  in  saying  that  miracles  have  been  proved 
incredible — the  word  proved  being  used  in  the  sense 
in  which  alone  it  has  meaning  when  applied  to  the 
field  of  perceptions  (p.  168). 

§   15. —  The  Bases  of  Laplace's  Theory  lie  in  an  Experience 
as  to  Ignorance. 

I  have  said  enough,  I  think,  to  indicate  that  if  La- 
place's theorems  be  correct  and  can  be  first  applied  to 
measure  the  probability  of  the  repetition  of  events, 
our  belief  in  the  routine  of  perceptions  is  based  upon 
that  high  degree  of  probability,  which  renders  pro- 
bable and  provable  practically  the  same  word.  Let  us 
consider  the  basis  of  Laplace's  theory  a  little  more 
closely.  Suppose  we  take  a  shilling  and  toss  it,  then 
the  chances  that  head  or  tail  will  be  uppermost  are 
exactly  equal  ;  unity  denoting  certainty,  we  say  that 
the  probability  of  a  head  equals  J.  If  we  toss  it 
again  the  chances  of  a  head  will  not  be  altered  and 
will  again  be  £,  and  so  on  for  each  throw,  the  chance 
always  remaining  \.  Since  in  two  throws  we  might 
with  equal  probability  have  any  of  the  four  cases  : 
head,  head  :  tail,  tail :  head,  tail :  tail,  head,  it  follows 
that  the  recurrence  of  head  has  only  a  probability  of 
£  or  \  x  \.  Similarly  the  probability  that  three  heads 

1  This  refers  to  the  hypothesis  (p.  163)  that  man  in  the  course  of  evo- 
lution has  attained  a  perceptive  faculty  which  in  the  normal  condition 
can  only  present  sequences  of  perceptions  in  the  form  of  routine.  Such 
routine  being,  as  we  have  seen,  the  sole  basis  of  knowledge,  is  of 
enormous  advantage  to  man. 


172  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

will  be  tossed  in  succession  may  be  easily  seen  by 
counting  the  possible  cases  to  be  J  or  ^  x  J  X  J  ;  that 
is,  the  odds  are  seven  to  one  against  a  triple  recur- 
rence. Extending  this  to  20  or  30  recurrences  of 
heads,  we  soon  find  that  there  is  an  overwhelming 
probability  against  a  succession  of  recurrences  without 
a  break. 

Instead  of  the  shilling,  let  us  take  a  bag  and  put 
into  it  an  equal  number  of  black  and  white  balls.  The 
probability  of  a  random  drawing  resulting  in  a  white 
ball  will  now  be  ^-,  and  this  will  at  each  drawing, 
provided  the  balls  be  returned  to  the  bag,  be  the 
probability  in  favour  of  a  white  ball.  Now  let  us  look 
upon  the  world  of  perceptions  as  a  bag  containing 
white  and  black  balls,  a  white  ball  representing  a 
routine-order,  and  a  black  ball  an  anomy  or  breach  of 
routine.  Then,  since  we  see  no  reason  why  percep- 
tions should  have  a  routine  or  should  not  have  a 
routine,  may  we  not  assert  that  each  are  equally 
likely,  or  that  there  will  be  the  same  number  of  black 
and  white  balls  in  our  bag  ?  If  this  be  so,  then 
obviously  the  odds  are  seven  to  one  against  a  routine- 
order  occurring  even  three  times  without  a  single 
anomy,  and  are  overwhelming  against  no  breach  of 
routine  occurring  at  all.  Yet  the  only  supposition 
that  we  appear  to  have  made  is  this  :  that,  knowing 
nothing  of  nature,  routine  and  anomy  are  to  be 
considered  as  equally  likely  to  occur.  Now,  we 
were  not  really  justified  in  making  even  this 
assumption,  for  it  involves  a  knowledge  that 
we  do  not  possess  regarding  nature.  We  use  our 
experience  of  the  constitution  and  action  of  coins  in 
general  to  assert  that  heads  and  tails  are  equally 
probable,  but  we  have  no  right  to  assert  before  ex- 


CAUSE  AND   EFFECT.      PROBABILITY.  173 

perience  that,  as  we  know  nothing  of  nature,  routine 
and  breach  of  routine  are  equally  probable.  In  our 
ignorance  we  ought  to  consider  before  experience 
that  nature  may  consist  of  all  routines,  all  anomies,  or 
a  mixture  of  the  two  in  any  proportion  whatever,  and 
that  all  such  are  equally  probable.  Which  of  these  con- 
stitutions after  experience  is  the  most  probable  must 
clearly  depend  on  what  that  experience  has  been  like. 

To  return  to  the  case  of  the  coin,  we  must  suppose 
all  experience  of  the  action  of  coins  withdrawn  from 
us  ;  it  must  be  unknown  to  us,  whether  coins  are  so 
constituted  as  to  have  a  head  on  both  faces,  a  tail  on 
both  faces,  or  a  head  on  one  and  a  tail  on  the  other. 
The  probability  of  any  one  of  these  three  equally 
probable  constitutions  would  before  experience  be  -J. 
Now  suppose  we  had  the  experience  of  two  tosses  both 
resulting  in  heads.  On  the  first  constitution  of  the 
body  this  would  be  a  certain  result,  or  its  probability 
be  represented  by  I  ;  on  the  second  constitution  the 
result  would  be  impossible,  or  the  probability  would  be 
zero,  while  on  the  third  constitution — that  of  the  cus- 
tomary coin — the  probability  of  the  result  would  be  J. 
Experience^  then,  shows  us  that  one  constitution  of  the 
coin  is  impossible,  and  that  another  constitution  will 
certainly  give  the  observed  result,  while  the  odds 
against  the  remaining  possible  constitution  giving  it 
are  3  : 1.  Obviously  a  double  head  is  a  more  probable 
constitution  for  the  coin  than  head  and  tail.  But  in 
what  ratio  is  this  constitution  more  probable  than  the 
other?  This  is  determined  by  a  principle  due  to 
Laplace  which  we  may  state  as  follows  : — 

"  If  a  result  might  flow  from  any  one  of  a  certain 
number  of  different  constitutions,  all  equally  probable 
before  experience,  then  the  several  probabilities  of  each 


174  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

constitution  after  experience  being  the  real  constitu- 
tion, are  proportional  to  the  probabilities  that  the 
result  would  flow  from  each  of  these  constitutions." 

Thus  in  our  case  the  head-head  constitution  gives  a 
probability  of  I  that  the  observed  result  will  arise,  while 
head-tail  only  gives  a  probability  of  J.  Hence,  on 
Laplace's  principle,  the  odds  are  four  to  one  that 
our  coin  has  a  head  on  both  sides.  We  must  be  care- 
ful to  note  that  this  result  depends  entirely  on  the 
assumption  that  coins  may  have  any  constitution 
whatever  ;  it  ceases  to  have  application  when  we  have 
once  had  the  experience  that  coins  usually  have  a 
head  and  a  tail.  But  it  may  be  said,  ought  we  not  to 
have  had  the  actual  experience  that  coins  may  be  of 
any  constitution  before  we  can  predict  that  the  in- 
dividual coin  which  has  twice  turned  up  heads  is 
probably  a  double-headed  coin  ?  Can  we  assume 
without  such  experience  that,  where  we  are  ignorant, 
all  constitutions  are  a  priori  equally  probable  ?  May 
we  for  the  very  reason  that  we  know  nothing  "  dis- 
tribute our  ignorance  equally  "  ?  The  logic  of  this 
proceeding  has  been  called  in  question  by  more  than 
one  writer,  notably  by  the  late  Professor  G.  Boole.1 
We  may  indeed  reasonably  question  whether  it  is 
possible  to  draw  knowledge  out  of  complete  ignor- 
ance. But  before  we  can  agree  with  Boole  that 
Laplace's  method  is  nugatory,  we  must  ask  whether, 
after  all,  his  principle  is  not  based  on  knowledge, 
namely,  on  that  derived  from  experience  that  in 
cases  where  we  are  ignorant,  there  in  the  long  run  all 
constitutions  will  be  found  to  be  equally  probable. 

1  An  Investigation  of  the  Laws  of  Thought  (London,  1854),  chap.  xx. 
Problems  Relating  to  the  Connexion  of  Causes  and  Effects,  especially 
PP.  363-75. 


CAUSE  AND   EFFECT.      PROBABILITY.  1/5 

A  good  example  of  this  has  been  given  by  Pro- 
fessor Edgeworth.  Suppose  we  divide  143,678  by  7 
and  stop  at  the  fourth  figure  of  the  quotient,  we  have 
2,052  as  the  result.  Now  we  may  be  supposed 
ignorant  of  what  the  next  figure  will  turn  out  to  be, 
and  in  our  ignorance  all  the  digits  from  o  to  9  are 
equally  probable.  Why  ?  Because  if  we  divided  a 
very  great  quantity  of  numbers  of  6  figures  by  7, 
stopping  at  the  fourth  digit  in  the  quotient,  we  should 
find  that  the  number  of  times  each  of  the  digits  from 
o  to  9  would  occur  in  the  fifth  place,  were  practically 
equal.  In  other  words,  statistics  would  justify  the 
"  equal  distribution  of  our  ignorance,"  or  experience 
show  us  that  in  our  ignorance  all  constitutions  were 
equally  probable.  This  example  may,  perhaps,  suffice 
to  show  that  there  is  an  element  of  human  experience 
at  the  basis  of  Laplace's  assumption.  The  reader 
who  wishes  to  pursue  this  subject  further  may  be 
referred  in  the  first  place  to  Professor  Edgeworth's 
article.1  "  I  submit,"  he  writes,  "  the  assumption, 
that  any  probability-constant  about  which  we  know 
nothing  in  particular  is  as  likely  to  have  one  value 
as  another,  is  grounded  upon  the  rough  but  solid 
experience  that  such  constants  do  as  a  matter  of  fact 
as  often  have  one  value  as  another." 

The  reader  may,  however,  ask  why  may  not 
"  nature "  change  after  one  set  of  experiences  and 
before  another  ?  The  true  answer  to  this  question 
lies  in  the  views  expressed  partly  in  earlier  chapters 
of  this  work,  partly  in  the  following  chapter  on  Space 
and  Time.  Nature,  we  have  seen,  is  a  construct  of  the 
human  mind  (pp.  50,  122-9,  x^3)  \  time  an^  space  are 
not  inherent  in  an  outside  world,  but  are  modes  of  dis- 

1  "  The  Philosophy  of  Chance,"  Mind,  vol.  ix.  pp.  223-35,  1884. 


176  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

criminating  groups  ofsense-impresssions  (pp.  183,  217). 
Thus  "  nature  "  is  essentially  conditioned  by  our  per- 
ceptive faculty,  and  "  change  "  cannot  be  thought  of  as 
apart  from  ourselves.  That  "nature"  is  identical  "before 
and  after  experience"  will  be  admitted,  as  soon  as  it  is 
recognized  that  time  and  change  relate  to  perception, 
and  not  to  the  "  beyond  "  of  sense-impressions.  The 
sameness  of  the  perceptive  faculty  is  the  key  to  the 
sameness  of  the  modes  of  perception.  The  conditions 
for  each  trial  (as  in  throwing  a  die  or  in  drawing  from 
a  bag)  remaining  the  same,  lie  therefore  solely  in  the 
identity  of  the  perceptive  faculty. 

§  1 6. — Nature  of  Laplace's  Investigation. 
We  are  now  in  a  position  to  return  to  our  bag  of 
white  and  black  balls,  but  we  can  no  longer  suppose 
an  equal  number  of  both  kinds,  or  that  routine  and 
breach  of  routine  are  equally  probable.  We  must 
assume  our  "  nature  bag  "  to  have  every  possible  con- 
stitution, or  every  possible  ratio  of  black  to  white 
balls  to  be  equally  likely ;  to  do  this  we  suppose  an 
infinitely  great  number  of  balls  in  all.  We  may  then 
calculate  the  probability  that  with. each  of  these  con- 
stitutions the  observed  result,  say  /  white  balls  and  q 
black  balls  (or,  p  cases  of  routine,  and  q  anomies) 
would  arise  in/+^  drawings.1  This  will  determine, 
by  Laplace's  principle,  the  probability  that  each  hypo- 
thetical constitution  is  the  real  constitution  of  the 
bag.  Let  these  probabilities  be  represented  by  the 
letters  Px,  P2,  P3  .  .  .  &c.  We  may  then  determine 
the  probabilities  on  each  of  these  constitutions  that  a 
white  ball  will  be  drawn  in  the  (p -\-q-\-\yti\  drawing. 
If  these  probabilities  be  represented  by  the  letters 

1  The  reader  may  suppose  the  ball  returned  to  the  bag  after  each 
drawing. 


CAUSE  AND   EFFECT.      PROBABILITY.  177 

Ci,  C2,  C3  .  .  .  &c.,  then  by  a  well-known  law  for 
compounding  probabilities  J  we  shall  find  that  the 
total  probability  in  favour  of  a  white  ball  occurring 
on  the  (p+q-\-  i)th  drawing,  or  of  a  routine  following 
on/  routines  and  q  anomies,  is — 

PI  CI  +  P2C2+P3C3  +  .  .  . 

Now  all  this  is  pure  calculation  ;  it  involves  no  neiv 
principle,  nothing  the  reader  may  not  take  on  faith,  if 
he  is  not  an  adept  in  mathematical  analysis.  We 
shall  therefore  suppose  the  calculation  made2  as 
Laplace  made  it,  and  the  result  will  be  found  to  be 
that  given  on  our  p.  170,  namely,  the  probability  that 
a  white  ball  will  be  drawn  is  ^Jfr2.  Or,  since  q  is  either 
zero  or  vanishingly  small  as  compared  with  /,  we 
have  the  overwhelming  probability  of  the  routine  of 
perceptions  being  maintained  on  the  next  trial. 

§  17. — The  Permanency  of  Routine  for  the  Future. 
One  particular  case  is  worth  noting.  Suppose  we 
have  experienced  m  sequences  of  perceptions  which 
have  repeated  themselves  n  times  without  any 
anomy.  Suppose,  further,  a  new  sequence  to  have 
repeated  itself  r  times  also  without  anomy.  Then  in 
all  we  have  had  m  (n — i)  +  r — I  repetitions,  or  cases 
of  routine,  and  no  failures  ;  hence  the  probability  that 
the  new  sequence  will  repeat  itself  on  the  (r+  i)th 
occasion  is  obtained  by  putting  p=m(it — 1)  +  ? — I 
and  q=o  in  the  result  of  §  16,  or  the  odds  in  favour  of 
a  routine  occurring  on  the  next  occasion  with  the  new 

1  The  reader  will  find  this  law  discussed  in  any  elementary  work  on 
algebra.     See,  for  example,  Todhunter's  Algebra,  §§  732  and  746. 

2  See  Todhunter's  History  of  the  Theory  of  Probability,  Arts.  704, 
847-8.     Boole's  Laws  of  Thought,  chap.  xx.   §  23 ;  or  T.   Galloway, 
A  Treatise  on  Probability,  §  v.,  "  On  the  Probability  of  Future  Events 
deduced  from  Experience." 

13 


178  THE   GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

sequence  are  m  (n — i)+r  to  I.  Therefore  if  m  and  n 
are  very  great,  there  will  be  overwhelming  odds  in 
favour  of  the  new  sequence  following  routine,  although 
r,  or  the  number  of  times  it  has  been  tested,  be  very 
small.1 

Our  discussion  of  the  probability  basis  for  routine 
in  the  sequences  of  perceptions  has  perforce  been 
brief,  and  only  touched  the  fringe  of  a  vast  and 
difficult  subject.  Yet  it  may  perhaps  suffice  to  in- 
dicate that  the  odds  in  favour  of  that  routine  being 
preserved  in  the  immediate  future,  or,  indeed,  for  any 
finite  interval,  both  with  regard  to  old  and  to  new 
groups  of  perceptions,  are  overwhelming.2  We.  may  be 
absolutely  unable  to  demonstrate  any  inherent  neces- 
sity for  routine  from  our  perceptions  themselves,  but 
our  complete  ignorance  of  such  necessity,  combined 

1  We  must  be  cautious  in  applying  this  formula  to  take  a  sufficiently 
comprehensive  sequence  of  perceptions.  We  must  see  that  the  causes  are 
really  the  same,  before  we  predict  on  the  basis  of  past  experience  of  routine 
in  perceptions  a  repetition  of  sequence  in  any  particular  case.     That  I 
have  twice  seen  a  certain  river  overflow  its  banks,  and  never  seen  that 
river  without  a  flood,  will  not  enable  me  to  predict  that  the  flood  will 
always  occur  when  I  see  the  river.     I  must  add  to  these  perceptions, 
those  of  the  season  of  the  year,  of  the  amount  of  sun  which  has  acted  on 
the  snow-fields  and  glaciers  at  its  source,  of  the  condition  of  its  banks, 
&c.,  &c.,  before  I  have  a  sufficiently  wide  range  of  causes  to  enable 
me  to  predict  from  two  repetitions  the  occurrence  of  a  third.     I  must 
indeed  show  that  in  my  supposed  identical  sequences  there  are  really 
the  same  components.    The  reader  who  wishes  to  study  this  point  more 
thoroughly  must  be  referred  to  Mill's  "  Canons  of  Induction  "  (System  of 
Logic,  book  iii.),  an  elementary  discussion  of  which  will  be  found  in  the 
"  Lessons  on  Induction,"  pp.  210-64,  °f  Stanley  Jevons'  Elementary 
Lessons  in  Logic. 

2  The  odds  in  favour  of  a  sequence  repeating  itself  s  times,  when  the 
past  shows/  repetitions  and  no  failure  are  p-\-i  to  s.     The  number  of 
repeated  sequences  in  the  universe,  or  /,  is  practically  infinite,  so  that 
the  odds  are  overwhelming  so  long  as  s  is  finite.     We  cannot,  how- 
ever, argue  from  this  result  for  an  infinite  future  of  repetition. 


CAUSE  AND   EFFECT.      PROBABILITY.  179 

with  our  past  experience,  enables  us  by  aid  of  the 
theory  of  probability  to  gauge  roughly  how  unlikely 
it  is  that  the  possibility  of  knowledge  and  the  power 
of  thinking  will  be  destroyed  in  our  generation  by 
those  breaches  of  routine,  which,  in  popular  language, 
we  term  miracles. 

So  much  science  can  tell  us  at  present ;  more  we 
can  only  hope  to  know,  if  we  admit  that  routine  flows 
from  the  nature  of  our  perceptive  faculty  and  not 
from  the  sphere  beyond  sense-impression.  If  science 
must  at  the  present  stage  perforce  be  content  with  a 
belief  in  the  immediate  permanency  of  the  universe 
(based  on  a  probability,  which  in  practical  life  we 
should  term  certainty),  we  must  at  the  same  time 
remember  that  because  a  proposition  has  not  yet 
been  proved,  we  have  no  right  to  infer  that  its  con- 
verse must  be  true.  It  is  not  a  case  of  balancing 
contradictory  evidence,  for  not  a  single  valid  argu- 
ment is  to  be  found  in  the  whole  range  of  human 
experience  for  inferring  a  first  or  last  cause.  There 
may  be  a  beginning  and  an  end  to  life  on  our  planet ; 
we  may  term  these,  if  we  please,  a  "  first  and  a  last 
catastrophe."  But  among  the  myriad  planetary  sys- 
tems we  see  on  a  clear  night,  there  surely  must  be 
myriad  planets  which  have  reached  our  own  stage  of 
development,  and  teem,  or  have  teemed,  with  human 
life.  The  first  and  last  catastrophe  must  have  oc- 
curred a  myriad  times,  and  were  we  able  to  watch 
through  long  thousands  of  years  the  changing 
brilliancy  of  stars,  the  first  and  last  catastrophe 
would  appear  to  us  not  as  a  first  and  last  cause, 
but  as  much  a  routine  of  perceptions  as  the  birth 
and  death  of  individual  men. 


180  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

SUMMARY. 

1.  Cause  is  scientifically  used  to  denote  an  antecedent  stage  in  a 
routine  of  perceptions.     In  this  sense  force  as  a  cause  is  meaningless. 
First  Cause  is  only  a  limit,  permanent  or  temporary,  to  knowledge. 
No  instance,  certainly  not  will,  occurs  in  our  experience  of  an  arbitrary 
first  cause  in  the  popular  sense  of  the  word. 

2.  There  is  no  inherent  necessity  in  the  routine  of  perceptions,  but 
the  permanent  existence  of  rational  beings  necessitates  a  routine  of  per- 
ceptions ;   with   the   cessation   of  routine   ceases   the  possibility  of  a 
thinking  being.     The  only  necessity  we  are  acquainted  with  exists  in 
the  sphere  of  conceptions  ;  possibly  routine  in  perceptions  is  due  to  the 
constitution  of  the  perceptive  faculty. 

3.  Proof  in  the  field  of  perceptions  is  the  demonstration  of  over- 
whelming probability.     Logically  we  ought  to  use  the  word  know  only 
of  conceptions,  and  reserve  the  word  believe  for  perceptions.     "  I  know 
that  the  angle  at  the  circumference  on  any  diameter  of  a  circle  is  right," 
but  "  I  believe  that  the  sun  will  rise  to-morrow."     The  proof  that  for 
no  finite  future  a  breach  of  routine  will  occur  depends  upon  the  solid 
experience  that  where  we  are  ignorant,  there  statistically  all  constitutions 
of  the  unknown  are  found  to  be  equally  probable. 


LITERATURE. 

BOOLE,  G. — An  Investigation  of  the  Laws  of  Thought,  chaps,  xvi.-xx. 

London,  1854. 
EDGEWORTH,  F.  Y. — "The  Philosophy  of  Chance,"  Mind,  vol.  ix., 

1884,  pp.  223-35. 

GALLOWAY,  T. — A  Treatise  on  Probability.     Edinburgh,  1839. 
JEVONS,  W.  STANLEY. — The  Principles  of  Science,  chaps,  x.-xii. 
MILL,  JOHN  STUART. — System  of  Logic,  book  iii.,  Induction,    ist  ed., 

1843,  8th  ed->  l872- 

MORGAN,  A.  DE. — The  Theory  of  Probabilities.     London,  1838. 
VENN,  J. — The  Logic  of  Chance.     London,  1866. 

The  reader  who  wishes  to  study  Laplace's  labours  at  first-hand  will 
find  a  guide  to  his  memoirs  and  some  account  of  the  various  editions  of 
his  Theorie  analytique  des  Probabilites,  in  Todhunter's  History  of 
the  Theory  of  Probability,  chap.  xx.  He  may  also  consult  Arts. 
841-857  of  the  same  History. 


CHAPTER  V. 
SPACE    AND    TIME. 

§  i. — Space  as  a  Mode  of  Perception. 

IN  our  second  chapter  (p.  77)  we  saw  that  the  dis- 
tinction between  "  inside  "  and  "  outside  "  ourselves 
was  not  a  very  real  or  well-defined  one.  Certain  of 
the  vast  complex  of  our  sense-impressions  we  term 
inside,  others  again  we  term  outside.  To  a  savage 
the  beginning  of  outside,  the  limit  to  self,  is  un- 
doubtedly his  skin  ;  although  on  occasion  he  may 
extend  the  idea  of  self  farther,  and  be  peculiarly 
careful  of  what  becomes  of  such  outward-lying  por- 
tions of  self  as  nail-parings  and  hair-clippings.  The 
skin  seems  to  him  to  bound  off  self  from  an  outside 
world  of  non-self.  The  group  of  sense-impressions 
which  he  calls  skin,  marks  off  a  world  which  he  can 
see  and  feel  from  one  which  in  the  normal  condition 
is  inaccessible  to  sight  or  touch.  His  first  experiences 
of  pain  arise,  or  at  least  are  perpetuated,  from  some- 
thing within  this  invisible  and  intangible  world,  and 
the  nerve-vibrations,  which  he  classifies  as  pain,  he 
postulates  as  inside  self;  his  indigestion  does  not 
seem  immediately  associated  with  the  visible  and 
tangible  world  outside  his  skin.  Thus  the  sense- 
impression  pain,  even  when  associated  later  with 
a  group  of  other  sense-impressions  classified  as  those 
of  sight  and  touch,  is  still  differentiated  from  them 


1 82  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

as  something  especially  internal.  I  receive  for  a 
moment,  and  then  they  vanish,  the  feelings  of  hard- 
ness and  pain  ;  both  may  come  to  the  seat  of  my 
consciousness  as  nerve-vibrations,  or  even  by  the 
same  nerve-vibration  ;  both  are  associated  with  stored 
impresses  of  past  hardnesses  and  pains,  yet  I  project 
the  sense-impression  hardness  into  something  out- 
side self,  but  the  pain  I  consider  as  something 
peculiar  to  my  inside.  I  spe,ak  of  my  pain  and  your 
pain  ;  yet  not  of  my  hardness  and  your  hardness,  but 
of  hardness  as  something  peculiar  to  the  table-leg. 
I  thus  give  an  objective  reality  to  one  group  of 
sense-impressions,  which  I  refuse  to  another. 

Now  this  distinction  seems  to  me  to  have  arisen  from 
the  historical  fact  that  the  stored  sense-impresses  with 
which  we  associate  hardness  have  been  drawn  from 
the  tangible  and  visible  world  "  outside  skin,"  while 
those  with  which  we  associate  pain  have  been  largely 
drawn  from  the  intangible  and  invisible  world  "in- 
side skin."  Even  as  our  knowledge  develops  and 
"inside  skin"  becomes  less  intangible  and  invisible, 
even  as  we  learn  to  associate  pain  with  the  stored 
impresses  of  various  local  organs  "  inside  skin,"  we  still 
feel  it  a  somewhat  doubtful  use  of  language  to  talk 
of  pain  as  "  existing  in  space."  Gradually,  however, 
the  skin  has  ceased  to  be  a  well-marked  boundary 
between  outside  and  inside.  Self,  like  the  soul  of 
the  metaphysicians,  has  disappeared  from  body  and 
been  concentrated  in  consciousness.  Self,  seated 
(metaphorically,  not  physically)  in  the  telephonic 
brain  exchange,  receives  an  infinite  variety  of 
messages,  which  we  can  only  assume  to  reach  self  in 
precisely  the  same  manner.  Yet  self  classes  some 
groups  of  these  messages  together,  and  speaks  of  them 


SPACE  AND   TIME.  183 

as  objects  existing  in  space,  while  to  other  groups  it 
has  denied  in  the  past,  or  still  denies,  this  spacial 
existence.  How  far  is  this  distinction  logical,  how 
far  historical  ?  J 

Now  we  shall  find  that  the  instant  we  associate  a 
number  of  sense-impressions  in  a  group,  and  separate 
them  in  perception  from  other  groups,  we  consider 
them  "  to  exist  in  space."  Space  is  thus,  in  the  first 
place,  a  mental  expression  for  the  fact  that  the  per- 
ceptive faculty  has  separated  coexisting  sense-im- 
pressions into  groups  of  associated  impressions. 
This  separation  of  immediate  sense-impressions  into 
groups,  this  discriminating  power  of  the  perceptive 
faculty  is,  at  any  rate  in  the  early  stages  of  man's 
development,  most  clearly  recognized  and  closely 
associated  with  the  senses  of  sight  and  touch.  Hence 
it  comes  about  that  the  invisible  and  intangible 
"  inside  skin  "  is  at  first  not  considered  as  in  space. 
Later,  for  example,  as  we  localize  pain,  or  associate 
it  with  other  sense-impressions  classified  as  visible 
and  tangible,  we  treat  "  inside  skin "  as  belonging 
to  space.  Yet  we  still  frequently  consider  the 
presence  of  visible  and  tangible  members  a  condition 
for  a  spacial  group  of  sense-impressions.  Space,  says 
Thomas  Reid,  is  known  directly  by  the  senses  of 
sight  and  touch.  But  probably  a  like,  if  less  powerful, 
means  of  discriminating  groups  of  sense-impressions 
lies  in  the  senses  of  sound  and  smell.2  We  localize 

1  By  historical  I  mean  that  which  arises  in  the  natural  history  of 
man  from  imperfect  knowledge  and  illogical  inference.    Thus  the  belief 
in  ghosts,  witches,  and  storm-spirits  is  a  perfectly  intelligible  stage  in 
the  natural  history  of  man,  but  not  a  logical  inference  from  any  natural 
phenomena  in  the  light  of  more  perfect  knowledge. 

2  My  baby  when  three  days  old  was  able  to  distinguish  between  the 
snapping  of  the  fingers  of  the  right  and  left  hands,  and  to  follow  with 


1 84  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

sounds  and  smells  without  necessarily  associating 
them  with  visible  and  tangible  resounding  and  smell- 
ing bodies.  It  will,  I  think,  be  admitted  on  reflection 
that  whenever  we  concentrate  our  attention  on  a 
limited  group  of  associated  sense-impressions,  then 
we  consider  them  as  spacial,  or  "  existing  in  space." 
We  join  together,  owing  to  past  experience,  certain 
sense-impressions  as  a  permanent  group,  and  we  then 
mentally  separate  this  group  from  other  groups.  The 
actual  boundary  of  the  group,  however,  when  we 
attempt  to  define  it  is  found  in  reality  to  be  vague 
(p.  80).  The  group,  although  in  the  main  a  per- 
manent association,  has  a  continual  flow  in  and  out 
of  junior  partners  ;  while  some  of  the  partners  belong, 
on  closer  examination,  as  much  to  one  association 
as  another.  The  separation  is  thus  rather  practical 
than  real ;  it  arises,  in  the  first  place,  from  the  fact 
that  in  our  perception  certain  sense-impressions  are 
more  or  less  permanently  grouped  together,  and,  in 
the  second  place,  from  the  mental  habit  of  concen- 
trating our  attention  on  one  of  these  groups  by 
placing  about  it  in  conception  an  arbitrary  boundary 
separating  it  from  other  groups.  Such  arbitrary 
boundaries  are  conceptions  drawn  doubtless  from 
sense-impressions  of  sight  and  touch,  but  they  corre- 
spond, as  we  shall  soon  see,  to  nothing  real  in  the 
world  of  sense-impression  or  in  phenomena. 

The  coexistence  of  more  or  less  permanent  and 
distinct  groups  of  sense-impressions  is  a  fundamental 
mode  of  our  perception  ;  it  is  one  of  the  ways  in 
which  we  perceive  things  apart.  There  is  nothing  in 

the  ear  the  direction  of  the  sound.  She  would  turn  to  a  voice  long 
before  she  paid  any  attention  to  bodies  moving  quite  close  to  her  eyes. 
Difference  of  position  was  thus  associated  with  sound. 


SPACE  AND   TIME.  185 

sense-impressions  themselves  which  involves  the 
notion  of  space,  but  whether  space  be  "  due "  to 
something  behind  sense-impression  or  to  the  nature 
of  the  perceptive  faculty  itself  we  are  unable  at 
present  to  decide.  Leibniz  has  defined  space  as  the 
order  of  possible  coexisting  phenomena.  This  order 
may  "  arise  "  from  something  behind  phenomena,  or 
from  the  machinery  of  perception,  but  in  either  case 
the  order  itself  is  simply  a  mode  or  manner  in  which 
we  perceive  things.  The  reader  must  distinguish 
carefully  between  the  groups  of  sense-impressions 
themselves  and  the  order  in  which  we  perceive  them 
to  coexist.  Perhaps  the  distinction  will  be  best 
brought  out  by  considering  the  letters  of  the  alpha- 
bet :— 

A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  F,  G, . . . 

The  letters  may  be  said  to  have  a  real  existence  like 
the  groups  of  sense-impressions  we  term  objects. 
The  order  of  the  letters  is  merely  the  mode  in  which 
we  perceive  them  to  coexist  as  an  alphabet.  The 
"  existence "  we  attribute  to  the  order  is  thus  of  a 
totally  different  character  to  the  "existence"  we 
attribute  to  the  letters.  The  alphabet  has  in  itself 
no  existence  except  for  the  letters  it  contains,  but 
the  letters,  on  the  other  hand,  could  have  a  real 
existence  if  they  had  never  been  arranged  in  any 
order  or  alphabet.  The  alphabet  has  merely  exis- 
tence as  a  manner  of  looking  at  all  the  letters  to- 
gether. These  results  may  all  be  interpreted  of 
coexisting  groups  of  sense-impressions  and  their 
order  space.  A  single  sense-impression  might,  indeed, 
exist  for  us  without  any  coexisting  groups  being 
postulated,  but  space  would  have  no  meaning  if  there 
were  not  such  coexisting  groups.  Space  is  an  order 


1 86  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

or  mode  of  perceiving  objects,  but  it  has  no  existence 
if  objects  are  withdrawn,  no  more  than  the  alphabet 
could  have  an  existence  if  there  were  no  letters. 

If  the  reader  has  once  grasped  this  point — and  it  is 
undoubtedly  a  difficult  and  hard  one  (for  our  senses 
of  sight  and  touch  lead  us  imperceptibly  to  confuse 
the  reality  of  sense-impressions  with  our  mode  of 
perceiving  them), — then  he  will  cease  to  look  upon 
space  as  an  enormous  void  in  which  objects  have 
been  placed  by  an  agency  in  nowise  conditioned  by 
his  own  perceptive  faculty  ;  he  will  begin  to  consider 
space  as  an  order  of  things,  but  not  itself  a  thing. 
To  say,  therefore,  that  a  thing  "  exists  in  space  "  is  to 
assert  that  the  perceptive  faculty  has  distinguished  it 
as  a  group  of  sense-impressions  from  other  groups  of 
sense-impressions,  which  actually  or  possibly  coexist. 
We  cannot  dogmatically  deny  that  the  order  of  co- 
existing phenomena  "  arises  "  from  something  behind 
sense-impressions,1  but  we  may  feel  pretty  confident 
that  space,  our  mode  of  perceiving  these  phenomena, 
is  very  different  from  anything  in  the  unknowable 
world  behind  sense-impressions.  Once  recognize 
space  as  a  mode  of  the  perceptive  faculty,  and  it 
appears  as  something  peculiar  to  the  individual  per- 
ceptive faculty.  Without  any  perceptive  faculty  it  is 
conceivable  that  sensations  might  exist  (see  p.  123), 
but  there  could  not  be  that  mode  of  perception  we 
term  space.  The  remarkable  fact  is  this :  that  the 
order  of  coexisting  phenomena  is  apparently  the  same 
at  any  rate  for  the  vast  majority  of  human  perceptive 

1  Just  as  little  ought  we  to  assert  that  it  does.  The  word  arise 
suggests  causation  ;  but  the  word  causation  is  meaningless  as  a  relation 
between  the  unknowable  beyond  of  sense-impression  and  sense- 
impression  itself  (see  pp.  82  and  151). 


SPACE  AND   TIME.  1 87 

faculties.  Why  should  this  mode  of  perception  be 
the  same  for  all  normal  human  faculties — or,  perhaps 
it  would  be  better  to  say,  very  approximately  the 
same  ?  We  express  the  problem  and  the  mystery 
wrongly  when  we  ask  "why  space  seems  the  same 
to  you  and  me  ; "  we  ought  more  precisely  to  ask 
"  why  your  space  and  my  space  are  alike." 
Because  our  perceptive  faculties  are  of  the  normal 
type,  may  be  the  immediate  answer  ;  but  how  similar 
organizing  centres  have  come  to  exist  in  the  chaos  of 
sensations  remains  still  to  be  described. 

Some  light  perhaps  may  be  thrown  on  this  difficult 
problem  by  considerations  which  will  be  more  fully 
developed  in  our  chapter  on  Life.  Man  has  not 
reached  his  present  high  stage  of  development  solely 
by  individualistic  tendencies,  but  also  by  socialistic 
or  gregarious  tendencies.  The  struggle  of  man 
against  man  might  suffice  to  bring  about  a  co-ordina- 
tion of  the  individual  man's  perceptive  and  reasoning 
faculties  (p.  124),  but  in  the  struggle  of  group 
against  group,  and  of  group  with  its  environment,  it 
is  clear  that  a  great  advantage  would  follow  to  any 
group  from  a  close  agreement  of  the  perceptive 
faculties  of  its  members,  and  great  disadvantage  to 
any  group  without  this  agreement.  The  survival  of 
the  former  would  be  the  natural  result. 

§  2. — The  Infinite  Bigness  of  Space. 

"  How  big  is  space  ?  "  is  a  meaningless  question  as 
it  stands.  "  How  big  is  space  for  me  ?  "  admits,  how- 
ever, of  an  answer.  It  is  just  so  large  as  will  suffice 
to  separate  all  things  which  coexist  for  me.  Let  the 
reader  try  to  imagine  phenomenal  space  apart  from 
groups  of  sense-impressions  and  he  will  quickly 


1 88  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

discover  how  big  space  is  for  him.  Space,  he  will  at 
once  recognize,  has  no  meaning  when  we  cease  to 
perceive  things  apart — to  distinguish  between  groups 
of  sense-impressions.  We  ought  constantly  to  bear 
in  mind  that  space  is  peculiar  to  ourselves,  and  that 
we  ought  not  reasonably  to  be  stirred  to  greater 
admiration  by  anyone  descanting  on  the  "magnitude 
of  space,"  than  we  are  wont  to  be  when  reflecting  on 
the  complex  nature  of  our  own  perceptive  faculty. 
The  farthest  star  and  the  page  of  this  book  are  both 
for  us  merely  groups  of  sense-impressions,  and  the 
space  which  separates  them  is  not  in  them,  but  is  our 
mode  of  perceiving  them. 

There  is  a  cheap  and,  unfortunately,  common  form 
of  emotional  science  which  revels  in  contrasting  the 
"infinities  of  space"  with  the  "finite  capacities  of 
man."  As  instructive  samples  of  this  we  may  take 
the  following  passages  from  a  popular  writer  on 
astronomy : — 

"  Can  it  be  true  that  these  countless  orbs  are  really 
majestic  suns,  sunk  to  an  appalling  depth  in  the  abyss 
of  unfathomable  space  ?  " 

"  Yet,  after  all,  how  little  is  all  we  can  see  even 
with  our  greatest  telescopes,  when  compared  with  the 
whole  extent  of  infinite  space !  No  matter  how 
vast  may  be  the  depth  which  our  instruments  have 
sounded,  there  is  yet  a  beyond  of  infinite  extent. 
Imagine  a  mighty  globe  described  in  space,  a  globe 
of  such  stupendous  dimensions  that  it  shall  include 
the  sun  and  his  system,  all  the  stars  and  nebulae,  and 
even  all  the  objects  which  our  finite  capacities  can 
imagine.  Yet,  after  all,  what  must  be  the  relation  of 
even  this  great  globe  to  the  whole  extent  of  infinite 
space?  The  globe  will  bear  to  that  a  ratio  infinitely 


SPACE  AND   TIME*  189 

less  than  that  which  the  water  in  a  single  drop  of 
dew  bears  to  the  water  in  the  whole  Atlantic  Ocean."1 
To  speak  of  the  mode  in  which  we  perceive  co- 
existing phenomena  as  an  abyss  of  appalling  depth  is 
perhaps  rather  meaningless  phraseology  ;  but  the 
statement  that  infinite  space  contains  more  than  our 
finite  capacity  can  imagine  is  hopelessly  misleading. 
In  the  first  place,  the  space  of  our  perceptions,  the 
space  in  which  we  discriminate  phenomena,  is 
not  infinite  :  it  is  exactly  commensurate  with  the 
contents  of  that  finite  capacity  we  term  our  per- 
ceptive faculty.  In  the  second  place,  if  by  "  all  the 
objects  which  our  finite  capacities  can  imagine  "  the 
author  means  conceptions  and  not  perceptions,  he  is 
confusing  two  different  things — space,  as  the  order  of 
real  coexisting  phenomena,  what  we  may  term  real 
space,  and  the  space  of  our  thought,  the  conceptual 
space  of  geometry,  what  we  may  term  ideal  space. 
This  latter,  as  we  shall  see  in  the  sequel,  may  be 
conceived  as  either  finite  or  infinite,  although  a 
limited  portion  of  ideal  infinite  space  describes  most 
easily  the  real  space  of  our  perceptions.  Thus  the 
only  infinite  space  we  know  of,  so  far  from  being  a 
real  immensity  overwhelming  our  finite  capacities,  is 
a  product  of  our  own  reasoning  faculty.  On  the 
other  hand  cosmical  space,  the  mode  of  our  per- 
ception, is  finite  and  limited  by  the  range,  not  of 
what  we  imagine,  but  of  what  we  perceive  to  co-exist. 
The  mystery  of  space,  whether  it  be  the  finite  space 
of  perception  or  the  infinite  space  of  conception,  lies 
in,  and  not  outside,  each  human  consciousness.  We 
must  seek  it  either  in  our  power  of  distinguishing  (or 
of  perceiving  apart)  so  many  and  varied  groups  of 

1  Ball's  Story  of  the  Heavens,  pp.  2  and  538. 


THE  GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

sense-impressions — or,  in  our  power  of  drawing  con- 
ceptions, which  enables  us  to  pass  from  the  finite  real 
to  the  infinite  ideal.  Only  for  us,  as  perceiving  human 
beings,  has  space  any  meaning  ;  we  cannot  infer  it 
where  we  do  not  find  psychical  machinery  similar  to 
our  own. 

§  3. — The  Infinite  Divisibility  of  Space. 

The  space  of  our  perceptions,  as  we  have  seen,  is 
finite  and  varies  from  individual  to  individual  with 
the  range  and  complexity  of  his  perceptions.  As  it 
is  just  large  enough  for  our  perception  of  phenomena, 
so  it  is  just  small  enough,  by  which  we  are  to  under- 
stand that  it  is  not  "  infinitely  divisible."  The  limit 
to  its  divisibility  is  the  limit  to  our  power  of  per- 
ceiving things  apart.  Our  organs  of  sense  are  such 
that  only  sense-impressions  of  a  certain  intensity  or 
amplitude  fall  within  their  cognizance.  We  may 
resolve  phenomena  into  smaller  and  smaller  groups 
of  sense-impressions,  but  we  ultimately  reach  a  limit 
at  which  the  sense-impression  ceases.  We  may  divide 
a  piece  of  paper  up  into  more  and  more  minute 
fragments,  but  ultimately  they  cease  to  be  sensible 
even  by  the  aid  of  our  most  powerful  microscopes. 
We  have  then  reached  a  limit  to  our  mode  of  per- 
ceiving apart, — in  ordinary  parlance,  to  the  divisibility 
of  space.  We  may  possibly  conceive  smaller  divisions, 
but  in  doing  this  we  have  passed  from  the  sphere  of 
the  real  to  the  ideal — from  the  space  of  perception  to 
the  space  of  geometry.  It  seems  to  me  that  this 
transition  from  perception  to  conception,  often  made 
quite  unconsciously,  is  the  basis  of  all  the  difficulties 
involved  in  the  paradox  as  to  the  infinite  divisibility 


SPACE  AND  TIM£.  tQl 

of  space.  The  point  has  been  referred  to  by  Hume 
in  his  Essay  concerning  Human  Understanding? 
where  he  writes  as  follows  : — 

"  The  chief  objection  against  all  abstract  reasonings 
is  derived  from  the  ideas  of  space  and  time — ideas 
which,  in  common  life  and  to  a  careless  view,  are 
very  clear  and  intelligible,  but  when  they  pass  through 
the  scrutiny  of  the  profound  sciences  (and  they  are 
the  chief  object  of  those  sciences)  afford  principles 
which  seem  full  of  absurdity  and  contradiction.  No 
priestly  dogmas,  invented  on  purpose  to  tame  and 
subdue  the  rebellious  reason  of  mankind,  ever 
shocked  common  sense  more  than  the  doctrine  of 
the  infinite  divisibility  of  extension,  with  its  con- 
sequences, as  they  are  pompously  displayed  by  all 
geometricians  and  metaphysicians  with  a  kind  of 
triumph  and  exultation.  A  real  quantity,  infinitely 
less  than  any  finite  quantity,  containing  quantities 
infinitely  less  than  itself,  and  so  on  in  infinitum  ;  this 
is  an  edifice  so  bold  and  prodigious  that  it  is  too 
weighty  for  any  pretended  demonstration  to  support, 
because  it  shocks  the  clearest  and  most  natural  prin- 
ciples of  human  reason.  But  what  renders  the  matter 
most  extraordinary  is  that  these  seemingly  absurd 
opinions  are  supported  by  a  chain  of  reasoning,  the 
clearest  and  most  natural  ;  nor  is  it  possible  for  us  to 
allow  the  premises  without  admitting  the  con- 
sequences." 

Now  the  reader  should  carefully  note  the  uncon- 
scious transition  in  this  passage  from  the  ideas  of 
space  and  time  to  the  infinite  divisibility  of  real 
quantities.  The  transition  is  even  more  marked  in  a 

1  Section  xii.   part  ii.     Green  and  Grose  :  HumJs   Works,  vol.  iv. 
>  128. 


192  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

footnote  which  accompanies  the  passage,  and  which 
runs  thus : — 

"  Whatever  disputes  there  may  be  about  mathe- 
matical points,  we  must  allow  that  there  are  physical 
points — that  is,  parts  of  extension,  which  cannot  be 
divided  or  lessened  either  by  the  eye  or  imagination. 
These  images,  then,  which  are  present  to  the  fancy  or 
senses,  are  absolutely  indivisible,  and  consequently 
must  be  allowed  by  mathematicians  to  be  infinitely 
less  than  any  real  part  of  extension  ;  and  yet  nothing 
appears  more  certain  to  reason  than  that  an  infinite 
number  of  them  composes  an  infinite  extension. 
How  much  more  an  infinite  number  of  '  those 
infinitely  small  parts  of  extension,  which  are  still 
supposed  infinitely  divisible." 

Here  the  transition  from  perception  to  conception 
and  back  again  is  made  several  times  over.  A  point 
mathematically  defined  is  a  conception  and  has  no 
real  existence  in  the  field  of  perception.  It  is  true 
we  base  this  conception  on  our  perceptive  experience 
of  things  which  are  not  points,  but  the  mathematical 
point  is  not  a  limit  to  any  process  which  could  be 
carried  on  in  the  field  of  perception  ;  it  is  the  limit  to 
a  process  which  we  imagine  carried  on  in  the  field  of 
thought,  in  the  sphere  of  conceptions.  If  Hume 
means  by  a  physical  point  the  smallest  possible 
groups  of  sense-impressions  which  we  can  perceive 
apart,  then  this  cannot  be  divided  or  lessened  by  the 
eye.  But  this  physical  point  transferred  from  the 
field  of  perception  to  that  of  conception  can  in  the 
imagination  be  divided  over  and  over  again.  This  re- 
mark will  be  more  clearly  appreciated  when  we  come 
to  deal  with  the  geometrical  conception  of  space.  It 
suffices  for  the  present  to  note  that  Hume  passes  from 


SPACE   AND   TIME.  193 

the  eye  to  the  imagination,  from  the  mathematical  to 
the  physical,  from  the  fancy  to  the  senses,  as  if  the  geo- 
metrical theory  of  extension,  that  shorthand  method 
of  classifying  and  describing  coexisting  phenomena 
was  itself  the  world  of  phenomena.  Several  types  of 
geometry  can  be  elaborated  by  our  rational  faculty, 
and  the  results,  which  flow  from  them,  will  depend 
upon  the  statement  of  their  fundamental  axioms.  From 
these  types  we  select  that  one  which  will  enable  us  to 
describe  the  widest  range  of  phenomena  in  the 
briefest  possible  formula,  or  which  will  enable  us 
with  the  greatest  accuracy  to  classify  the  differences 
between  groups  of  sense-impressions.  We  have  no 
more  right  to  quarrel  with  the  geometrician's  con- 
ception of  tiis  infinite  divisibility  of  space  than  with 
his  conception  of  the  circle,  or  with  the  physicist's 
conception  of  the  atom.  One  and  all  are  pure  ideals 
beyond  the  range  of  perceptual  experience.  What 
we  must  ask  is  :  How  far  are  these  conceptions  of 
service  in  enabling  us  to  briefly  describe  and  classify 
our  perceptions  ;  how  far  do  they  aid  us  in  mentally 
storing  up  past  experience  as  a  guide  for  future  action  ? 
A  point  and  an  ellipse  may  be  absolutely  absurd  in  the 
world  of  perceptions,  but  they  are  none  the  less  valid 
and  useful  conceptions,  if  they  help  us  to  describe  and 
predict  the  motion  of  the  earth  about  the  sun.  The 
paradoxes  which  Hume  finds  in  the  conclusions  of 
geometry  only  exist  so  long  as  we  assert  that  every 
conception  has  a  precise  counterpart  in  perception, 
and  forget  that  science  is  only  a  shorthand  descrip- 
tion of  nature  and  not  nature  itself. 

§  4. — The  Space  of  Memory  and  Thought. 
Before  we  pass  from  the  subject  of  real  or  perceptual 


194  THE   GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

space,  we  ought  to  note  that  this  mode  of  perceiving 
phenomena  appears  not  only  in  association  with 
immediate  sense-impressions,  but  also  with  the  stored 
impresses  of  past  experience.  To  be  accurate,  we 
ought  perhaps  to  say  that  the  mode  of  remembrance 
is  akin  to  the  mode  of  perception — unless,  indeed, 
we  are  using  the  word  perception  to  refer  to  the  con- 
sciousness alike  of  an  "  external "  sense-impression 
and  of  an  "internal"  sense-impress.  In  all  probability 
these  processes  of  what  Locke  would  term  external 
and  internal  perception  are  much  the  same,  only 
the  sources  from  which  they  draw  their  material  are 
different.  In  this  case  it  is  sufficient  to  say  that  space 
as  a  mode  of  perception  applies  as  much  to  memory 
as  to  phenomena.  We  certainly  gain  by  this  method 
of  regarding  the  matter  new  insight  into  the  manner 
in  which  space  may  result  from  the  nature  of  the 
psychical  machinery.  No  one  can  look  upon  the 
space  whereby  the  impresses  of  past  experience  are 
grouped  and  distinguished  as  a  reality  apart  from 
internal  perceptions  ;  it  is  too  obviously  a  mode  of 
the  retentive  faculty.  But  the  distinction  between 
the  world  of  phenomena  and  the  world  of  memories 
lies  not  in  the  order  and  relation  of  their  contents, 
but  in  the  intensity  of  the  stimulus  and  the  quality  of 
the  association  in  the  two  cases.  The  candles,  the 
inkstand,  the  books  and  papers  on  my  table  have  the 
same  order  and  relation,  whether  I  see  and  touch 
them  or  simply  recall  them  as  a  memory,  but  there  is 
a  great  difference  in  the  vividness  I  of  the  external 

1  Hume's  definition  of  belief,  slightly  modified,  well  marks  the 
difference  :  A  group  of  immediate  sense-impressions  is  a  "  more  vivid, 
lively,  forcible,  firm,  steady  "  perception  of  an  object  than  a  group 
of  stored  impresses  alone  is  ever  able  to  attain  (Essay  Concerning 
Human  Understanding,  sec.  v.  part  ii.). 


SPACE   AND   TIME.  195 

and  internal  perceptions,  and  a  considerable  change 
in  the  range  of  stored  impresses  with  which  the 
contents  of  perception  are  associated  in  the  two 
cases. 

Once  recognize  space  as  the  mode  in  which  we 
perceive  coexisting  things  apart,  and  we  have  either 
to  multiply  spaces  or  to  consider  that  logically  all 
separation  denotes  space.  Thus  our  thoughts  and 
conceptions  will  be  found  almost  invariably  to 
involve  spacial  relationship,  while  the  psychical 
processes  themselves  are,  like  pain,  being  more 
and  more  localized  or  associated  with  individual 
centres  of  brain -activity.  It  may  fairly  be  said  that 
until  the  spacial  relationship  is  recognized  in  any  field, 
until  we  are  able  to  perceive  things  apart,  we  have  no 
basis  for  distinction,  comparison,  classification,  and 
the  resulting  scientific  knowledge.  It  is  especially 
from  the  localization  of  psychical  processes  that  we 
may  hope  for  great  results,  for  a  true  science  of 
psychology  in  the  future.  This  localization  is  not  a 
"  materialization "  of  thought,  it  is  merely  an  asso- 
ciation of  "  internal  "  and  "  external  "  perceptions, 
both  equally  factors  of  consciousness.  The  asso- 
ciation is  not  an  association  of  two  totally  diverse 
and  opposed  things — matter  and  mind — but  of  the 
two  phases  of  perception.  Groups  of  sense-im- 
pressions in  space,  being  conditioned  by  the  per- 
ceptive faculty,  are  as  much  a  part  of  the  sentient 
being  as  psychical  processes  themselves. 

Logically,  then,  it  seems  that  whenever  we  clearly 
separate  and  distinguish  coexisting  things,  we  per- 
ceive them  under  the  mode  space ;  and  perception 
under  this  mode  is  what  we  ought  to  mean  by 
"  existence  in  space."  Yet  historically  the  notion  of 


THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

space  has  arisen  from  the  separation  and  distinction 
of  groups  of  sense-impressions,  when  some  one  or  more 
members  in  each  group  were  due  to  sight  or  touch ; 
for  these  senses  are  those  by  which  groups  have,  in 
the  natural  history  of  man,  been  first  perceived  apart. 
Just  as  these  groups  of  sense-impressions  were  pro- 
jected outward  from  our  consciousness,  and  treated 
as  things  unconditioned  by  our  perceptive  faculty,  as 
objects  independent  of  the  sentient  being,  so  our 
mode  of  perception  was  treated  as  inherent  in  them, 
and  given  an  objective  existence,  fossils  of  which  are 
still  to  be  found  in  the  "  primeval  void  "  of  myth- 
ology, and  the  "  appalling  abyss  "  of  popular  astro- 
nomers. Only  gradually  have  we  learnt  to  recognize 
that  empty  space  is  meaningless,  that  space  is  a  mode 
of  perception — the  order  in  which  our  perceptive 
faculty  presents  coexistence  to  us.  We  are  not 
compelled  to  postulate  a  space  outside  self  for  pheno- 
mena, and  spaces  inside  self  for  memory,  thought, 
and  the  psychical  processes,  but  rather  we  must  hold 
that  the  mode  in  which  we  perceive  in  these  different 
fields  is  essentially  the  same,  and  that  this  mode  is 
what  we  term  space. 

§  5. — Conceptions  and  Perceptions. 

If  such  be  the  space  of  perception,  we  have  next 
to  ask  :  How  do  we  scientifically  describe  it  ?  What 
is  conceptual  space — the  space  with  which  we  deal 
in  the  science  of  geometry  ?  We  have  seen  that  our 
perceptive  faculty  presents  sense-impressions  to  us  as 
separated  into  groups,  and  further,  that  though  this 
separation  is  most  serviceable  for  practical  purposes, 
it  is  not  very  exactly  and  clearly  defined  "  at  the 
limits "  (p.  80).  How  do  we  represent  in  thought, 


StACE  AND  TIME.  197 

in  conception,  this  separation  into  groups  which 
results  from  our  mode  of  perception  ?  The  answer 
is  :  We  conceive  groups  of  sense-impressions  to  be 
bounded  by  surfaces,  to  be  limited  by  straight  or 
curved  lines.  Thus  our  consideration  of  conceptual 
space  leads  us  at  once  to  a  discussion  of  surfaces  and 
lines — to  a  study,  in  fact,  of  Geometry. 

Several  important  problems  at  once  present  them- 
selves for  investigation.  In  the  first  place,  have  these 
surfaces  and  lines  a  real  existence  in  the  world  of 
perception  ?  Are  they  phenomena  ?  Or,  are  they 
ideal  modes  whereby  we  analyze  the  manner  in  which 
we  perceive  phenomena  ?  In  the  second  place,  if 
they  should  be  only  ideals  of  conception,  what  is  the 
historical  process  by  which  they  have  been  reached  ? 
what  is  their  ultimate  root  in  perception  ? 

Now,  there  is  at  this  stage  an  important  remark  to 
be  made,  namely,  that  what  is  imperceptible  is  not 
therefore  inconceivable.  This  remark  is  all  the  more 
necessary,  for  it  seems  directly  opposed  to  the  healthy 
scepticism  of  Hume.1  Yet  unless  it  be  true  the 
whole  fabric  of  exact  science  falls  to  the  ground, 
neither  the  concepts  of  geometry,  nor  those  of 
mechanics,  would  be  of  service  ;  for  example,  the 
circle  and  the  motion  of  a  point  would  be  absurdities 
if,  being  imperceptible,  they  were  really  inconceivable. 
The  basis  of  our  conceptions  doubtless  lies  in  per- 
ceptions, but  in  imagination  we  can  carry  on  per- 
ceptual processes  to  a  limit  which  is  itself  not  a 
perception  ;  we  can  further  associate  groups  of  stored 
sense-impresses,  and  form  ideas  which  correspond  to 
nothing  in  our  perceptual  experience. 

1  See  especially  the  Treatise  of  Human  Nature^  part  ii.  Of  the 
Ideas  of  Space  and  Time.  Green  and  Grose's  Hume's  Works,  vol.  i. 
PP-  334-371- 


198  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

Here  a  word  of  caution  is,  however,  very  necessary. 
Because  we  conceive  a  thing,  we  must  not  argue 
that  it  is  either  possible  or  probable  as  a  perception. 
Indeed,  the  process  or  association  by  which  we  have 
reached  our  conception  may  in  itself  suffice  to  ex- 
hibit its  perceptual  impossibility  or  improbability. 
The  appeal  to  experience  can  alone  determine 
whether  a  conception  is  possible  as  a  perception.  For 
example,  experience  shows  me  that  there  is  a  sensible 
limit  to  the  visible  and  tangible  ;  hence  a  point, 
valid  as  a  conception,  can  never  have  a  real  existence 
as  a  perception.  I  reach  this  conception  of  a  point 
by  carrying  to  a  limit  in  my  imagination  a  process 
which  cannot  be  so  carried  in  perception.  Exactly  of 
the  same  character  are  my  conceptions  of  infinite 
distance  or  infinite  number  ;  they  are  the  concep- 
tual limits  to  processes,  which  may  be  started  in 
perception,  but  cannot  be  carried  to  a  limit  except  in 
the  imagination.  Somewhat  different  from  percep- 
tual impossibility  is  perceptual  improbability.  I  can 
conceive  Her  Majesty  Queen  Victoria  walking  down 
Regent  Street,  but,  tested  by  my  experience  of  the 
past  actions  of  royalty,  this  association  of  conceptions 
is  hardly  a  perceptual  probability.  These  instances 
may  be  sufficient  to  indicate  that  what  is  improbable 
or  impossible  in  perception  may  be  valid  in  concep- 
tion. But  we  must  ever  be  careful  to  bear  in  mind 
that  the  reality  of  the  conception,  its  existence  out- 
side thought,  can  only  be  demonstrated  by  an  appeal 
to  perceptual  experience.  The  geometrician  even 
asserts  the  phenomenal  impossibility  of  his  points, 
lines,  and  surfaces ;  the  physicist  by  no  means  pos- 
tulates the  existence  of  atoms  and  molecules  as 
possible  perceptions.  Science  is  content  for  the 


SPACE  AND   TIME.  199 

present  to  look  upon  these  concepts  as  existing  only 
in  the  sphere  of  thought,  as  purely  the  product 
of  man's  mind.  It  does  not,  like  metaphysics  or 
theology,  demand  any  existence  in  or  beyond  sense- 
impression  for  its  conceptions  until  experience  has 
shown  that  the  conceptual  limit  or  association  can 
become  a  perceptual  reality.1  The  validity  of  scien- 
tific conceptions  does  not  in  the  first  place  depend 
on  their  reality  as  perceptions,  but  on  the  means  they 
provide  of  classifying  and  describing  perceptions.  If 
a  circle  and  a  rectangle  have  no  real  existence,  they 
are  still  invaluable  as  enabling  me  to  classify  my  per- 
ceptions of  form,  to  describe,  however  imperfectly,  the 
difference  in  shape  between  the  faces  of  a  page  of  this 
book  and  of  my  watch.  They  are  symbols  in  that 
shorthand  by  means  of  which  science  describes  the 
universe  of  phenomena.  The  atom,  if  a  pure  con- 
ception, still  enables  us,  by  codifying  our  past  ex- 
perience, to  economize  thought ;  it  preserves  within 
reasonable  limits  the  material  upon  which  we  base 
our  prediction  of  possible  future  experience.  If  any 
one  tells  us  that  the  storm-god  is  to  some  minds  as 
conceivable  as  the  atom,  we  must,  in  the  first  place, 
reply  that  the  conceivable  is  not  the  real ;  and  further, 
that  the  value  to  man  of  any  ideal  of  conception 
depends  upon  the  extent  to  which  it  subsumes  the 
future  in  its  resume  of  the  past.  The  conception 
storm-god  may,  after  all,  be  of  some  value  as  a 
striking  monument  to  our  meteorological  ignorance, 

2  Leverrier  and  Adams  conceived  a  planet  having  a  definite  orbit  as  a 
method  of  accounting  for  the  irregularities  perceived  in  the  motions  of 
Uranus.  Their  conception  might  have  been  valid  as  a  manner  of 
describing  these  irregularities,  if  Neptune  itself  had  never  been  perceived 
— in  other  words,  if  their  conception  had  not  become  a  perceptual 
reality. 


20O  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

and  as  a  useful  reminder  that  we  must  "  be  prepared 
for  all  weathers." 

What  we  have  at  this  stage  to  notice  is  that  the 
mind  is  not  limited  to  perceptual  association,  and 
that  it  can  carry  on  in  conception  a  process  which 
may  be  begun,  but  cannot  be  indefinitely  continued 
in  the  sphere  of  perception.  The  scientific  value  of 
such  conceptions,  whether  reached  by  association  or 
as  a  limit,  must  in  every  case  be  judged  by  the 
extent  to  which  they  enable  us  to  classify,  describe, 
and  predict  phenomena. 

§  6. — Sameness  and  Continuity. 

Now  there  are  two  ideas  reached  as  conceptual 
limits  to  perceptual  processes  which  have  important 
bearings  on  the  geometrical  representation  of  space. 
These  may  be  expressed  by  the  words  sameness  and 
continuity.  So  far  as  our  perceptual  experience 
goes,  probably  no  two  groups  of  sense-impressions 
are  exactly  the  same.  The  sameness  in  each  depends 
upon  the  degree  of  our  examination  and  observation. 
To  a  casual  observer  all  the  sheep  in  a  flock  appear 
the  same,  but  the  shepherd  individualizes  each.  Two 
coins  from  one  die,  or  two  engravings  from  one  block 
will  always  be  found  to  possess  some  distinguishing 
marks.  We  may  safely  assert  that  absolute  sameness 
has  never  occurred  in  our  experience.  Not  even  a 
"  permanent  "  group  of  sense-impressions  or  an  object 
is  exactly  the  same  at  two  different  times.  Various 
elements  in  the  group  have  changed  slightly  with  the 
time,  the  light,  or  the  observer.  Take  a  polished 
piece  of  metal  and  note  two  parts  of  its  surface  ; 
they  appear  exactly  alike,  but  the  microscope  reveals 
their  want  of  sameness.  Thus  sameness  is  never  a 


SPACE   AND  TIME. 

real  limit  to  our  experience  of  phenomena  ;  the  more 
closely  we  examine,  the  less  is  the  sameness.  Yet, 
as  a  conception,  the  sameness  of  two  groups  of  sense- 
impressions  is  a  very  valid  idea,  and  the  basis  of 
much  of  our  scientific  classification.  In  the  sphere  of 
perceptions  sameness  denotes  the  identity  for  certain 
practical  purposes  of  two  slightly  different  groups  of 
sense- impressions.  In  the  sphere  of  conceptions, 
however,  sameness  denotes  absolute  identity  of  all 
the  members  of  either  group;  it  is  a  limit  to  a  process 
of  comparison  which  cannot  be  reached  in  the  per- 
ceptual world. 

The  idea  of  continuity,  in  the  sense  in  which  we  are 
now  considering  the  word,  involves  that  of  sameness. 
If  I  take  a  vessel  of  water,  I  find  a  certain  permanent 
group  of  sense-impressions  which  leads  me  to  term 
the  contents  of  the  vessel  water ;  if  I  take  a  small 
quantity  of  the  water  out  of  the  vessel  I  ftnd  the 
"  same  "  group,  and  this  still  remains  true  if  I  take  a 
smaller  and  smaller  quantity,  even  to  a  drop.  I  may 
continue  to  divide  the  drop,  but  apparently  as  long  as 
the  portion  taken  remains  sensible  at  all,  there  is  the 
same  group  of  sense-impressions,  and  I  term  the 
fraction  of  the  drop  water.  Now  the  question  arises, 
if  this  division  could  be  carried  on  indefinitely  should 
we  at  last  reach  a  limit  at  which  the  group  of  sense- 
impressions  would  change  not  only  quantitatively, 
that  is  in  intensity,  but  also  qualitatively  ?  If  we 
could  magnify  the  sense-impressions  due*  to  the 
infinitesimal  fraction  of  a  drop  of  water  up  to  a 
sensible  intensity,  would  they  so  differ  from  those 
characteristic  of  the  contents  of  the  original  vessel 
that  we  should  not  give  them  the  name  water  ?  Now 
we  cannot  test  the  effects  of  an  indefinitely  continued 


202  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

division  in  the  phenomenal  world,  for  we  soon  reach 
a  stage  at  which  we  fail  to  get,  by  the  means  at  our 
disposal,  any  sense-impressions  at  all  from  the  divided 
substances.  Our  magnifiers  of  sense-impression  have 
but  a  limited  range.1  But  although  in  the  sphere 
of  perceptions  there  is  no  possibility  of  carrying 
division  to  its  ultimate  limit,  we  can  yet  in  concep- 
tion repeat  the  process  indefinitely.  If  after  an 
infinite  number  of  divisions  we  conceive  that  the 
same  group  of  sense-impressions  would  be  found,  then 
we  are  said  to  conceive  the  substance  as  continuous. 
We  have  then  to  ask  how  far  the  conception  of 
continuity  applies  to  the  real  bodies  of  our  percep- 
tual experience.  From  the  finite  process  of  division 
which  is  possible  in  perception,  we  might  easily 
conclude  that  continuity  was  a  property  of  real 
substances ;  and  there  is  small  doubt  that  a  slight 
amount.of  observation  is  favourable  to  the  notion  that 
many  real  substances  are  continuous,  although  the 
infinite  division  necessary  to  the  conception  of  con- 
tinuity fails  as  a  perceptual  equivalent.  Further 
observation  and  wider  insight,  however,  contradict 
this  notion.  The  physicist  and  the  chemist  bring 
many  arguments  to  show  us  that  the  finite  process  of 
division  which  suggests  continuity  would,  if  carried  to 
an  infinite  limit,  show  bodies  to  be  discontinuous.  On 
a  first  and  untrained  inspection  we  find  a  continuity 
and  a  sameness  in  perceptions  which  disappear  on 
closer  and  more  critical  examination.  The  ideas 
conveyed  in  these  words  are  found  to  be  no  real 
limits  to  the  actual,  but  ideal  limits  to  processes  which 

1  E.g.,  the  microscope,  the  microphone,  the  spectroscope,  &c.  From 
the  spectroscope  we  obtain,  perhaps,  positive  indications  of  a  qualitative 
change  in  many  substances  as  the  quantity  is  diminished. 


SPACE  AND  TIME.  2O3 

can  only  be  carried  out  in  the  field  of  conception 
Bearing  this  in  mind  we  may  now  return  to  the 
geometrical  conceptions  of  space. 

§  7. — Conceptual  Space.     Geometrical  Boundaries. 

It  has  been  remarked  (p.  197)  that  we  conceive 
groups  of  sense-impressions  to  be  limited  by  surfaces 
and  lines.  We  speak  of  the  surface  of  the  table  ;  the 
fly-leaf  of  this  book  appears  to  be  separated  from  the 
air  above  it  by  a  plane  surface  and  that  plane  to  be 
bounded  at  its  upper  edge  by  a  portion  of  a  straight 
line.  In  the  first  place  we  have  to  ask  whether  our 
geometrical  notions  of  line  and  plane  correspond  to 
the  limits  of  anything  we  actually  find  in  perception 
or  whether  they  are  purely  ideal  limits  to  processes 
begun  in  perception,  but  which  it  is  impossible  to 
carry  to  a  limit  in  perception.  The  answer  to  these 
questions  lies  in  the  conceptions  of  sameness  and  con- 
tinuity. The  geometrical  ideas  of  line  and  plane 
involve  absolute  sameness  in  all  their  elements  and 
absolute  continuity.  Every  element  of  a  straight  line 
can  in  conception  be  made  to  fit  every  other  element, 
and  this  however  it  be  turned  about  its  terminal 
points.  Every  element  of  a  plane  can  be  made  to  fit 
every  other  element,  and  this  without  regard  to  side. 
Further,  every  element  of  a  straight  line  or  a  plane, 
however  often  divided  up,  is  in  conception,  when 
magnified  up,  still  an  element  of  straight  line  or 
plane. 

The  geometrical  ideas  correspond  to  absolute 
sameness  and  continuity,  but  do  we  experience  any- 
thing like  these  in  our  perceptions  ?  The  fly-leaf  of 
this  book  appears  at  first  sight  a  plane  surface 
bounded  by  a  straight  line,  but  a  very  slight  in- 


2O4  THE   GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

spection  with  a  magnifying  lens  shows  that  the 
surface  has  hollows  and  elevations  in  it,  which  quite 
defy  all  geometrical  definition  and  scientific  treat- 
ment. The  straight  line  which  seems  to  bound  its 
edge  becomes,  under  a  powerful  glass,  so  torn  and 
jagged  that  its  ups  and  downs  are  more  like  a  saw 
edge  than  a  straight  line.  The  sameness  and  con- 
tinuity are  seen  to  be  wanting  on  more  careful 
investigation.  We  take  a  glass  cube  skilfully  cut  and 
polished,  and  its  faces  appear  at  first  as  true  planes. 
But  we  find  that  a  small  body  placed  upon  one  of  its 
faces  does  not  slide  off  when  the  cube  is  slightly 
tilted.  The  face  of  the  cube  must,  after  all,  be  rough, 
there  are  hollows  and  projections  in  it  which  catch 
those  of  the  superposed  body  ;  our  plane  again 
appears  delusive.  Or,  we  may  take  one  of  Whit- 
worth's  wonderful  metal  planes  obtained  by  rubbing 
the  faces  of  three  pieces  of  metal  upon  each  other. 
Here  again  a  powerful  microscope  reveals  to  us  that 
we  are  still  dealing  with  a  surface  having  ridges  and 
hollows. 

The  fact  remains,  that  however  great  the  care  we 
take  in  the  preparation  of  a  plane  surface,  either  a 
microscope  or  other  means  can  be  found  of  sufficient 
power  to  show  that  it  is  not  a  plane  surface.  It  is 
precisely  the  same  with  a  straight  line  ;  however 
accurate  it  appears  at  first  to  be,  exact  methods  of 
investigation  invariably  show  it  to  be  widely  removed 
from  the  conceptual  straight  line  of  geometry.  It 
is  a  race  between  our  power  of  representing  a  straight 
line  or  plane  and  our  power  of  creating  instruments 
which  demonstrate  that  the  sameness  and  continuity 
of  the  geometrical  conceptions  are  wanting.  Abso- 
lutely perfect  instruments  could  probably  only  be 


SPACE   AND   TIME.  205 

constructed  if  we  were  already  in  possession  of  a  true 
geometrical  line  or  plane,  but  the  instruments  we  can 
make  appear  invariably  to  win  the  race.  Our  ex- 
perience gives  us  no  reason  to  suppose  that  with  any 
amount  of  care  we  could  obtain  a  perceptual  straight 
line  or  plane,  the  elements  of  which  would  on  indefinite 
magnification  satisfy  the  condition  of  ultimate  sameness 
involved  in  the  geometrical  definitions.  We  are  thus 
forced  to  conclude  that  the  geometrical  definitions 
are  the  results  of  processes  which  may  be  started,  but 
the  limits  of  which  can  never  be  reached  in  percep- 
tion ;  they  are  pure  conceptions  having  no  corre- 
spondence with  any  possible  perceptual  experience 
What  we  have  said  of  straight  lines  and  planes  holds 
equally  of  all  geometrically  defined  curves  and 
surfaces.  The  fundamental  conceptions  of  geometry 
are  only  ideal  symbols  which  enable  us  to  form  an 
approximate,  but  in  no  sense  absolute,  analysis  of  our 
sense-impressions.  They  are  the  scientific  shorthand 
by  which  we  describe,  classify,  and  formulate  the 
characteristics  of  that  mode  of  perception  which  we 
term  perceptual  space.  Their  validity,  like  that  of  all 
other  conceptions,  lies  in  the  power  they  give  us  of 
codifying  past  and  predicting  future  experience. 

We  speak  of  a  spherical  or  cubical  body,  and  say 
that  it  is  of  such  and  such  a  capacity.  But  no  per- 
ceptual body  is  ever  truly  spherical  or  cubical,  and  the 
size  we  attribute  to  it  is  at  best  an  approximate  one. 
Further  analysis  of  our  sense-impressions  leads  us  in 
each  case  to  find  variations  from  the  geometrical 
definition  and  measurement.  Yet  the  conceptions  of 
sphere  and  cube  are  frequently  sufficient  to  enable  us 
to  classify  and  identify  various  bodies  and  predict  the 
different  types  of  sense-impression  to  which  these 


206  THE   GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

bodies  correspond.1  Perhaps  no  better  instance  than 
geometry  can  be  taken  to  show  how  science  describes 
the  world  of  phenomena  by  aid  of  conceptions  corre- 
sponding to  no  reality  in  phenomena  themselves. 
That  our  geometrical  conceptions  enable  us  on  the 
whole  to  so  effectually  describe  perceptual  space  is 
only  a  striking  instance  of  the  practically  equal 
development  of  our  perceptive  and  reasoning  faculties 
(p.  125). 

§  8. — Surfaces  as  Boundaries. 

Although  perceptual  boundaries  do  not,  on  ultimate 
analysis,  in  any  way  correspond  to  any  special  geo- 
metrical definition  such  as  that  of  plane  or  sphere,  we 
have  still  to  inquire  whether  they  answer  to  our 
conception  of  surface  at  all.  By  surface  in  this  sense 
we  are  to  consider,  not  something  of  which  it  would 
be  possible  to  analyze  the  properties  by  any  of  the 
known  processes  of  geometry,  but  any  continuous 
boundary  between  two  groups  of  sense-impressions  or 
bodies.2  Is  there  a  continuous  boundary  between  the 

1  Our  whole  system  of  measuring  size  will  be  found  to  be  based  on 
geometrical  conceptions  having  no  actuality  in  perception. 

2  "  That  which  has  position,  length  and  breadth  but  not  thickness,  is 
called  surface. 

"  The  word  surface  in  ordinary  language  conveys  the  idea  of  extension 
in  two  directions  ;  for  instance,  we  speak  of  the  surface  of  the  earth,  the 
surface  of  the  sea,  the  surface  of  a  sheet  of  paper.  Although  in  some 
cases  the  idea  of  the  thickness  or  the  depth  of  the  thing  spoken  of  may 
be  present  in  the  speaker's  mind,  yet  as  a  rule  no  stress  is  laid  on 
depth  or  thickness.  When  we  speak  of  a  geometrical  surface,  we  put 
aside  the  idea  of  depth  and  thickness  altogether  "  (H.  M.  Taylor,  Pitt 
Press  Euclid,  i.-ii.  p.  3).  It  seems  to  me  that  in  ordinary  language 
there  is  something  more  than  length  and  breadth  involved — there  is  an 
idea  of  continuous  boundary.  It  is  difficult  to  say  how  far  this  idea  is 
really  involved  in  the  word  extension.  A  veil  may  nave  extension  in 
two  directions,  but  it  fails  to  fulfil  our  idea  of  surface  because  ^  ''s  not  a 
continuous  boundary. 


SPACE   AND   TIME.  2O/ 

open  page  of  this  book  and  the  air  above  it  ?  Would 
it  be  possible  to  say  at  any  distinct  step  of  the 
passage  from  air  to  paper,  here  air  ends  and  paper 
begins?  At  this  point  we  reach  one  of  the  most 
important  problems  of  science.  Are  we  to  consider 
the  groups  of  sense-impressions  which  we  term  bodies 
continuous  or  not  ?  If  bodies  are  not  continuous,  then 
it  is  clear  that  boundaries  are  only  mental  symbols  of 
separation,  and  on  deeper  analysis  correspond  to  no 
exact  reality  in  the  sphere  of  sense-impression. 

Would  every  element  of  the  surface  of  a  body  still 
appear  to  us  a  continuous  boundary,  however  small 
the  element  and  however  much  we  magnified  it  up  ? 
If  I  could  take  the  hundredth  part  of  a  square  inch 
of  this  page  and  magnify  it  to  a  billion  times  its 
present  size,  would  there  still  appear  a  continuous 
boundary  between  air  and  paper  ? 

Consider  the  boundary  of  still  water.  It  furnishes 
us  with  the  impression  of  a  continuous  surface.  On 
the  other  hand,  examine  a  heap  of  sand  closely,  and 
it  appears  to  have  no  continuous  boundary  at  all. 
Are  there  any  reasons  which  would  lead  us  to  suppose 
that,  if  we  could  sufficiently  magnify  a  small  element 
of  this  page  of  paper,  it  would  produce  in  us  sense- 
impressions  not  of  continuity  but  of  discontinuity  ? 
Would  it  look,  supposing  it  were  still  visible,  like  the 
surface  of  water,  or  rather  like  a  heap  of  sand,  a  pile 
of  small  shot,  or,  better  still,  like  a  starry  patch  of  the 
heavens  on  a  clear  night  ?  No  group  of  stars  is  in 
perception  separated  from  another  by  a  line  or 
surface.  We  can  imagine  such  boundaries  drawn 
across  the  heavens,  but  we  do  not  perceive  them.  We 
have,  then,  to  ask  whether  the  boundary  between 
paper  and  air,  if  immensely  magnified,  would  look 


208  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

sideways,   not    indeed   like  a   geometrical   line,  but 
roughly  like  the  first  or  second  of  these  figures  : — 


FlGS.   2  AND  3. 

Now  no  direct  answer  can  really  be  given  to  this 
question,  because  bodies  cease  to  impress  us  sensibly 
long  before  we  reach  the  point  at  which  the  appear- 
ance of  continuity  might  be  expected  to  disappear. 
We  cannot  predict  what  our  sense-impressions  would 
be,  if  we  could  magnify  a  drop  of  water  up  to  the  size 
of  the  earth.  But  we  may  put  the  question  in  a 
slightly  different  way.  We  may  ask  :  Would  it  enable 
us  to  classify  and  describe  phenomena  better  if  we 
conceived  bodies  to  be  continuous  as  in  Fig.  2,  or 
discontinuous  as  in  Fig.  3  ?  The  physicist  promptly 
replies :  I  can  only  conceive  bodies  to  be  discon- 
tinuous. Discontinuity  is  essential  to  the  methods  by 
which  I  describe  and  formulate  my  sense-impressions 
of  the  phenomenal  world. 

§  9. — Conceptual  Discontinuity  of  Bodies.     The  Atom. 

Foremost  among  the  physicist's  reasons  for  postu- 
lating the  discontinuity  of  bodies  is  the  elasticity 
which  we  notice  in  all  of  them.  Air  can  be  placed 


SPACE   AND   TIME. 

under  a  piston  in  a  cylinder  and  compressed  ;  a  bar 
of  wood  can  be  bent — in  other  words,  a  portion  of  it 
squeezed  and  another  portion  stretched.  Even  the 
amounts  by  which  we  can  squeeze  iron  or  granite  are 
capable  of  measurement.  Now,  it  is  very  hard,  I 
think  impossible,  to  conceive  how  we  can  alter  the 
size  of  bodies  if  we  suppose  them  continuous.  We 
feel  ourselves  compelled  to  assert  that,  if  the  parts  of 
a  body  move  closer  together,  they  must  have  some- 
thing free  of  body  into  which  they  can  move.  If  a 
body  were  continuous  and  yet  compressible,  there 
appears  to  be  no  reason  why  it  should  not  be  indefi- 
nitely compressible,  or  indefinitely  extensible,  both 
results  repugnant  to  our  experience.  Further,  our 
sense-impressions  of  temperature  in  both  gaseous 
and  solid  bodies,  and  of  colour  in  solid  bodies,  the 
phenomena  of  pressure  in  gases,  and  those  of  the 
absorption  and  emission  of  light,  are  easily  analyzed 
and  described,  if  we  conceive  the  ultimate  parts  of 
bodies  to  have  a  capacity  for  relative  motion  ;  but 
there  is  no  possibility  of  conceiving  such  a  motion 
if  all  the  parts  of  a  body  are  continuous.  A  crowd 
of  human  beings  seen  from  a  great  height  may  look 
like  a  turbulent  fluid  in  motion  at  every  point.  But 
we  know  from  experience  that  this  motion  is  only 
possible,  because  there  is  some  void  in  the  crowd. 
It  may  become  so  densely  packed  that  motion  is  no 
longer  practicable.  Thus  it  is  with  that  relative 
motion  of  the  parts  of  bodies  upon  which  so  much 
of  modern  physics  depends  ;  absolutely  close  pack- 
ing, that  is  continuity,  seems  to  render  it  impos- 
sible. It  is  only  by  reducing  in  conception  the 
complex  groups  of  sense-impressions,  which  we  term 
bodies,  into  simple  elements  directly  depending  on 

IS 


2IO  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

the  motion  of  discontinuous  systems, — of  what  we 
may  term  granular  or  starlike  systems, — that  we  have 
been  able  to  resume  phenomena  in  the  wide-reaching 
laws  of  physics  and  chemistry.  The  relative  motion 
of  the  ultimate  parts  of  bodies,  involving  the  idea 
of  discontinuity  is  one  of  the  fundamental  concep- 
tions of  modern  science  (p.  159).  These  ultimate  parts 
of  bodies  we  are  accustomed  to  speak  of  as  atoms ; 
groups  of  atoms  which  apparently  repeat  themselves 
over  and  over  again  in  the  same  body, — something 
like  planetary  systems  in  the  starry  universe, — we 
term  molecules.  The  generally  accepted  atomic  or 
molecular  theory  of  bodies  postulates  essentially 
their  discontinuity.  Take,  for  example,  a  spherical 
drop  of  water — to  follow  Sir  William  Thomson- 
suppose  it  to  be  as  big  as  a  football,  then  if  we  could 
magnify  the  whole  drop  up  to  the  size  of  the  earth, 
the  structure,  he  tells  us,  would  be  more  coarse- 
grained than  a  heap  of  small  shot,  but  probably  less 
coarse-grained  than  a  heap  of  footballs. x 

Now  I  propose  later  to  return  to  the  atomic  hy- 
pothesis. At  present  I  will  only  ask  the  reader  to 
look  upon  atom  and  molecule  as  conceptions  which 
very  greatly  reduce  the  complexity  of  our  description 
of  phenomena.  But  what  it  is  necessary  to  notice  at 
this  stage  is  :  that  the  conception  atom,  when  applied 
to  our  perceptions,  is  opposed  to  the  conception  of 
surface  as  the  continuous  boundary  of  a  body.  We 
have  here  an  important  example  of  wJiat  is  not  an 
uncommon  occurrence  in  science,  namely,  two  con- 
ceptions which  cannot  both  correspond  to  realities  in 
the  perceptual  world.  Either  perceptual  bodies  have 

1  Popular  Lectures  and  Addresses^  vol.  i.,  "  The  Size  of  Atoms,"  p, 
217. 


SPACE  AND  TIME.  211 

continuous  boundaries,  and  the  atomic  theory  has  no 
perceptual  validity  ;  or,  conversely,  bodies  have  an 
atomic  structure,  and  geometrical  surfaces  are  per- 
ceptually impossible.  At  first  sight  this  result  might 
appear  to  the  reader  to  involve  a  contradiction  be- 
tween geometry  and  physics  ;  it  might  seem  that 
either  physical  or  geometrical  conceptions  must  be 
false.  But  the  whole  difficulty  really  lies  in  the  habit 
we  have  formed  of  considering  bodies  as  objective 
realities  unconditioned  by  our  perceptive  faculty. 
We  cannot  too  often  recall  the  fact  that  bodies  are 
for  us  more  or  less  permanent,  more  or  less  clearly 
defined  groups  of  sense-irnpressions,  and  that  the 
correlations  and  sequences  among  the  sense-impres- 
sions are  largely  conditioned  by  the  perceptive  faculty. 
At  the  present  time  we  have  no  sense-impressions 
corresponding  to  geometrical  surface  or  to  atom ;  we 
may  legitimately  doubt  whether  our  perceptive 
faculty  is  of  such  a  nature  that  it  could  present 
impressions  in  any  way  corresponding  to  these  con- 
ceptions. It  is  impossible,  therefore,  to  say  that  one 
of  these  conceptions  must  be  real  and  the  other 
unreal,  for  neither  at  present  has  perceptual  validity — 
that  is,  exists  in  the  world  of  real  things.  As  con- 
ceptions both  are  equally  valid  ;  both  are  equally 
ideals,  not  involved  in  our  sense-impressions  them- 
selves, but  which  the  reasoning  faculty  has  dis- 
covered and  developed  as  a  means  of  classifying 
different  types  of  sense-impressions  and  of  resuming 
in  brief  formulae  their  correlations  and  sequences. 

Thus  geometrical  truths  apply  with  absolute  ac- 
curacy to  no  group  whatever  of  our  sense-impres- 
sions ;  but  they  enable  us  to  classify  very  wide 
ranges  of  phenomena  by  aid  of  the  notions  of 


212  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

position,  size,  and  shape.  Geometry  enables  us  to 
predict  with  absolute  certainty  a  variety  of  relations 
between  sense-impressions,  when  these  impressions 
do  not  involve  more  than  a  certain  keenness  in  our 
senses,  more  than  a  certain  degree  of  exactness  in 
our  measuring  instruments.  The  absolute  sameness 
and  continuity  demanded  by  geometrical  conceptions 
do  not  exist  as  limits  in  the  world  of  perceptual  expe- 
rience, but  only  as  approximations  or  averages.1  In 
precisely  the  same  way  the  theory  of  atoms  treats  of 
ideal  conceptions  ;  it  enables  us  to  classify  another 
and  different  range  of  sense-impressions,  and  to 
formulate  their  mutual  relations  to  a  certain  degree 
of  keenness  again  in  our  senses,  or  of  exactness  in  our 
scientific  apparatus.  Should  the  atom  become  a 
perception  as  well  as  a  conception,  this  would  not 
invalidate  the  usefulness  of  geometry.  Very  pro- 
bably, however,  if  we  could  magnify  a  football  up  to 
the  size  of  the  earth,  so  that  the  perceptual  atom,  if 
it  existed,  would  have  a  size  between  small  shot  and 
a  football,  we  should  find  that  the  sense-impressions 
which  the  atom  was  conceived  to  distinguish  and 
resume,  had  themselves  disappeared  under  the  new 
conditions.2  In  other  words,  our  scientific  concep- 
tions are  valid  for  the  world  as  we  know  it,  but  we 
cannot  in  the  least  predict  how  they  would  be  related 
to  a  world  which  is  at  present  beyond  perception. 

1  Geometry  might  almost  be  termed  a  branch  of  statistics,  and  the 
definition  of  the  circle  has  much  the  same  character  as  that  of  Quetelet's 
rhomnie  moyen. 

2  The  visibility  and  tangibility  of  bodies  may  possibly  be  described 
by  the  motion  of  atoms,  but  we  cannot  predict  that  a  single  atom 
would  be  either  visible  or  tangible,  still  less  " bounded  by  a  surface." 


SPACE  AND   TIME.  213 

§  10. — Conceptual  Continuity.  Ether. 
The  reader  will  now  be  prepared  to  appreciate 
scientific  conceptions,  which,  if  they  corresponded  to 
realities  of  the  phenomenal  world,  would  contradict 
each  other.  Having  destroyed  the  continuity  of  bodies 
by  the  idea  of  atom,  it  might  at  first  sight  appear  as  if 
our  conceptual  space  were  fundamentally  different  from 
perceptual  space.  The  latter,  as  we  have  seen,  is  our 
mode  of  distinguishing  groups  of  sense-impressions, 
and  where  there  is  nothing  to  distinguish,  there  there 
is  no  space.  The  perceptive  faculty  rather  than 
nature  may  be  said  "to  abhor  a  vacuum."  On  the 
other  hand,  having  destroyed  the  continuity  of  bodies 
by  the  atomic  hypothesis,  we  seem  at  first  sight  to  be 
postulating  a  void  in  conceptual  space.  But  here  the 
physicist  compels  us  to  introduce  a  new  continuity. 
This  new  continuity  is  that  of  the  ether,  a  medium 
which  physicists  conceive  to  fill  up  the  interstices 
between  bodies  and  between  the  atoms  of  bodies. 
By  aid  of  this  concept,  the  ether  (to  which  we  shall 
return  later),  we  are  able  to  classify  and  resume 
other  wide  groups  of  sense -impressions.  With 
regard  to  the  perceptual  existence  of  the  ether,  it 
now  stands,  some  physicists  would  assert,  on  a  rather 
different  footing  from  that  of  the  atom.  By  the  real 
existence  of  anything  we  mean  (p.  85)  that  it  forms 
a  more  or  less  permanent  group  of  sense-impressions. 
Now  this  can  hardly  be  asserted  of  the  ether ;  we 
conceive  it  rather  as  a  conduit  for  the  motions  by 
which  we  interpret  sense-impression.  The  nerves 
seem  to  us  conduits  of  the  like  kind,  but  then  the 
nerves  also  appear  to  us  as  permanent  groups  of 
sense-impressions  apart  from  their  function  of  con- 
ductivity. There  are  no  sense-impressions  which  we 


214  THE  GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

class  together  and  term  ether,  and  on  this  account  it 
still  seems  better  to  consider  the  ether  as  a  concep- 
tion rather  than  a  perception.  It  is  true  that  to 
some  minds  the  ether  may  appear  as  real  a  perception 
as  the  air,  and  the  matter  is,  perhaps,  largely  one  of 
definition.  Still  Hertz's  experiments,1  for  example, 
do  not  seem  to  me  to  have  logically  demonstrated 
the  perceptual  existence  of  the  ether,  but  to  have 
immensely  increased  the  validity  of  the  scientific 
concept,  ether,  by  showing  that  a  wider  range  of 
perceptual  experience  may  be  described  in  terms 
of  it,  than  had  hitherto  been  demonstrated  by 
experiment.  Further,  many  of  the  properties  which 
we  associate  with  the  ether  are  not  such  as  our  past 
experience  shows  us  are  likely  to  become  matter  for 
direct  sense-impression.  I  shall  therefore  continue 
to  speak  of  the  ether  as  a  scientific  concept  on  the 
same  footing  as  geometrical  surface  and  atom. 

§  n. — On  the  General  Nature  of  Scientific  Conceptions. 

Our  discussion  of  these  special  conceptions  will  the 
better  have  enabled  the  reader  to  appreciate  the 
nature  of  scientific  conceptions  in  general.  Geo- 
metrical surface,  atom,  ether,  exist  only  in  the  human 
mind,  and  they  are  "  shorthand  "  methods  of  dis- 
tinguishing, classifying,  and  resuming  phases  of  sense- 
impression.  They  do  not  exist  in  or  beyond  the 
world  of  sense-impressions,  but  are  the  pure  product 
of  our  reasoning  faculty.  The  universe  is  not  to  be 

1  Annalen  der  Physik,  1887-9.  See  also  Nature,  vol.  xxxix.  pp.  402, 
45°>  547-  -A-n  interesting  account  of  Hertz's  researches  by  von  Tunzel- 
vnann  will  be  found  in  The  Electrician  for  1888,  vol.  xxi.,  pp.  587,  625, 
663,  696,  725,  757,  788,  and  vol.  xxii.,  pp.  16,  41. 


SPACE  AND   TIME.  21$ 

thought  of  as  a  real  complex  of  atoms  floating  in 
ether,  both  atom  and  ether  being  to  us  unknowable 
"  things-in-themselves,"  producing  or  enforcing  upon 
us  the  world  of  sense-impressions.  This  would  indeed 
be  for  science  to  repeat  the  dogmas  of  the  meta- 
physicians, the  crassest  paradoxes  of  a  short-sighted 
materialism.  On  the  contrary,  the  scientist  postulates 
nothing  of  the  world  beyond  sense ;  for  him  the  atom 
andtheether  are, — like  the  geometrical  surface,— modes 
by  aid  of  which  he  resumes  the  world  of  sense.  The 
ghostly  world  of  "  things-in-themselves"  behind  sense 
he  leaves  as  a  playground  to  the  metaphysician  and 
the  materialist.  There  these  gymnasts,  released  from 
the  dreary  bondage  of  space  and  time,  can  play  all 
sorts  of  tricks  with  the  unknowable,  and  explain  to 
the  few  who  can  comprehend  them  how  the  universe 
is  "  created  "  out  of  will,  or  out  of  atom  and  ether,  how 
a  knowledge  of  things  beyond  perception,  beyond  the 
knowable,  may  be  attained  by  the  favoured  few.  The 
scientist  bravely  asserts  that  it  is  impossible  to  know 
what  there  is  behind  sense-impression,  if  indeed  there 
can  "  be  "  anything  ; *  he  therefore  refuses  to  project 
his  conceptions,  atom  and  ether,  into  the  real  world 
of  perception  until  he  has  perceived  them  there. 
They  remain  for  him  valid  ideals  so  long  as  they  con- 
tinue to  economize  his  thought. 

That  the  conceptions  of  geometry  and  physics 
immensely  economize  thought  is  an  instance  of  that 
wonderful  power  to  which  I  have  previously  referred 
in  this  work  (p.  125),  namely,  the  power  the  reason- 
ing faculty  possesses  of  resuming  in  conceptions  and 

1  Our  notion  of  "  being  "  is  essentially  associated  with  space  and 
time,  and  it  may  well  be  questioned  whether  it  is  intelligible  to  use 
the  word  except  in  association  with  these  modes  of  perception. 


2l6  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

brief  formulae  the  correlations  and  sequences  it  finds 
in  the  material  presented  to  it  by  the  perceptive 
faculty.  As  our  knowledge  grows,  as  our  sense 
becomes  keener  under  the  action  of  evolution  and 
with  the  guidance  of  science,  so  we  are  compelled  to 
widen  our  concepts,  or  to  add  additional  ones.  This 
process  does  not  as  a  rule  signify  that  the  original 
concepts  are  invalid,  but  merely  that  they  form  a  basis, 
which  is  only  sufficient  for  classifying  and  describing 
certain  phases  of  sense-impression,  certain  sides  of 
phenomena.  As  we  grow  cognizant  of  other  phases 
and  sides,  we  are  forced  to  adopt  new  concepts,  or  to 
modify  and  extend  the  old.  We  may  ultimately 
reach  perceptions  of  space  which  cannot  be  described 
by  the  geometry  of  Euclid,  but  none  the  less  that 
geometry  will  remain  perfectly  valid  as  an  analysis 
and  classification  of  the  wide  range  of  perceptions  to 
which  it  at  present  applies.  If  the  reader  will  bear 
in  mind  the  views  here  expressed  with  regard 
to  the  concepts  of  science,  he  will  never  consider 
that  science  reduces  the  universe  to  a  "  dead 
mechanism "  by  asserting  a  reality  for  atom  or 
ether  or  force  as  the  basis  of  sense-impression. 
Science,  as  I  have  so  often  reiterated,  takes  the 
universe  of  perceptions  as  it  finds  it,  and  endeavours 
briefly  to  describe  it.  It  asserts  no  perceptual  reality 
for  its  own  shorthand. 

One  word  more  before  we  leave  this  space  of  con- 
ception, separated  by  continuous  boundaries  in  the 
eye  of  the  geometrician,  peopled  with  atoms  and 
ether  by  the  mind  of  the  physicist.  How,  if 
geometrical  surface,  if  atom  and  ether  have  no 
perceptual  reality,  has  the  mind  of  man  historically 
reached  them  ?  I  believe  by  carrying  to  a  limit  in 


SPACE  AND  TIME.  21 7 

conception  processes  which  have  no  such  limit  in  per- 
ception. Preliminary  stages  in  comparison  show 
apparent  sameness  and  continuity,  where  more  exact 
and  final  stages  show  no  such  limit ;  hence  arises  the 
conception  of  continuous  boundaries.  The  atom 
again  is  a  conceptual  limit  to  the  moving  bodies  of  per- 
ception ;  while  the  ether  possesses  an  elasticity,  which 
we  have  never  met  with  in  the  elastic  bodies  of  our 
perceptual  experience,  but  which  is  a  purely  concep- 
tual limit  to  the  type  of  elastic  substances  with  which 
we  are  directly  acquainted.  These  concepts  them- 
selves are  a  product  of  the  imagination,  but  they  are 
suggested,  almost  insensibly  suggested,  by  what  we 
perceive  in  the  world  of  phenomena. 

§  12. — Time  as  a  Mode  of  Perception. 

I  have  dealt  at  greater  length  with  space  than  it 
will  be  necessary  to  deal  with  time,  for  much  that  has 
been  said  in  the  former  case  as  to  perception  and 
conception  will  directly  apply  to  the  latter.  Space 
and  time  are  so  similar  in  character,  that  if  space  be 
termed  the  breadth,  time  may  be  termed  the  length 
of  the  field  of  perception.  As  space  is  one  mode  in 
which  the  perceptive  faculty  distinguishes  objects,  so 
time  is  a  second  mode.  As  space  marks  the  co- 
existence of  perceptions  at  an  epoch  of  time — we 
measure  the  breadth  of  our  field — so  time  marks  the 
progression  of  perceptions  at  a  position  in  space — we 
measure  the  length  of  our  field.  The  combination  of 
the  two  modes,  or  change  of  position  with  change  of 
time,  is  motion,  the  fundamental  manner  in  which 
phenomena  are  in  conception  presented  to  us. 

If  we  had  solely  the  power  of  perceiving  coexist- 
ing things,  our  perception  might  be  wide,  but  it  would 


2l8  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

fall  far  short  of  its  actuality.  The  power  of  "  per- 
ceiving things  apart"  by  progression  or  sequence  is 
an  essential  feature  of  conscious  life,  if  not  of 
existence.  Without  this  time-mode  of  perception  the 
only  sciences  possible  would  be  those  which  deal  with 
the  order  or  correlation  of  coexisting  things,  with 
number,  position,  and  measurement — in  other  words, 
the  sciences  of  Arithmetic,  Algebra,  and  Geometry. 
Bodies  might  have  size  and  shape  and  locality,  but 
science  would  be  unable  to  deal  with  colour,  warmth, 
weight,  hardness,  &c.,  all  of  which  sense-impressions 
we  conceive  to  depend  upon  our  appreciation  of 
sequence.  In  short,  the  physical,  biological,  and  his- 
torical sciences,  which  have  for  their  essential  topics 
change,  or  sequence  in  perception,  would  be  im- 
possible. 

I  have  spoken  of  certain  branches  of  science  being 
possible  or  impossible  without  the  time-mode  of  per- 
ception. I  ought  rather  to  say  that  the  material  for 
these  branches  of  science  can  or  cannot  be  con- 
ceived to  exist  without  time.  For  in  truth  all 
scientific  knowledge  would  be  impossible  without 
time  ;  thought  undoubtedly  involves  an  association 
of  immediate  and  stored  sense-impressions  (p.  55); 
every  conception,  geometrical  as  well  as  physical,  is 
ultimately  based  on  perceptual  experience,  and  the 
very  word  experience  connotes  the  time-mode  of 
perceiving  things.  This  leads  us  to  what  at  first 
sight  appears  a  fundamental  distinction  between  the 
modes  space  and  time.  Space  as  our  method  of  per- 
ceiving coexisting  things,  of  distinguishing  groups  of 
immediate  sense-impressions,  is  associated  with  the 
world  of  actual  phenomena  which  we  project  outside 
ourselves  (p.  73).  For  this  reason  it  has  been 


SPACE  AND   TIME.  219 

termed  an  external  mode  of  perception.  On  the 
other  hand,  time  is  the  perception  of  sequence  in 
stored  sense-impresses — the  correlation  of  past  per- 
ceptions with  the  immediate  perception.  Thus  time 
involves  in  its  essence  memory  and  thought — in  other 
words,  consciousness?  Consciousness  might  indeed  be 
defined  as  the  power  of  perceiving  things  apart  by 
succession.  It  may  perhaps  be  possible  to  conceive 
consciousness  as  existing  without  the  space-mode  of 
perception,  but  we  cannot  conceive  it  to  exist  with- 
out the  time-mode.  On  this  account,  time  has  been 
termed  an  internal  mode  of  perception.  A  little  con- 
sideration, however,  soon  shows  us  that  this  distinc- 
tion is  not  a  very  valid  one — as,  indeed,  no  distinction 
based  on  the  words  external  and  internal  can  ever  be 
(p.  80).  Perception  in  space  is,  as  a  matter  of  fact, 
as  largely  dependent  on  the  association  of  immediate 
and  stored  sense-impressions  as  perception  in  time.  As 
we  have  seen,  every  object  is  for  us  largely  a  con- 
struct (p.  50),  and  the  coexisting  objects  which  we 
can  perceive  apart  are  indeed  very  limited.  I  dis- 
tinguish the  papers,  the  books,  the  inkstand,  the 
candlesticks  on  my  table  as  separate  objects  by  the 
mode  space ;  but  at  any  instant  of  time,  it  is  only  a  very 
small  element  of  this  complex  of  sense-impressions 
which  is  immediate,  the  rest  are  stored  sense-impresses, 
capable  of  becoming  immediate  sense-impressions  in 
the  next  instant,  but  not  so  in  actuality.  Thus  in  the 
case  of  both  time  and  space  the  "  perceiving  apart " 

1  For  a  new-born  infant  time  cannot  be  said  to  exist — it  is  without 
consciousness  (p.  53).  Only  as  stored  sense-impresses  result  from 
immediate  sense-impression  does  the  faculty  of  memory,  and  so  the 
time-mode  of  perception  become  developed.  The  rest  is  reflex  action, 
the  product  of  inherited  and  unconscious  association. 


22O  THE   GRAMMAR   OF  SCIENCE. 

is  the  perception  of  an  order  existing  between  a  very 
small  element  of  sense-impression  and  a  much  larger 
range  of  stored  sense-impresses.  We  do  not  therefore 
gain  by  terming  space  and  time  external  and  internal 
modes  of  perception.  Both  modes  of  perception  are 
so  habitual  and  yet  so  difficult  of  analysis,  so 
commonplace  and  yet  so  mysterious,  that,  although 
we  recognize  a  distinction  between  the  two,  we  are 
often  hardly  certain  whether  we  are  distinguishing 
things  by  time  or  by  space.  Why  we  perceive  things 
under  these  modes,  the  scientist  is  content  to  classify 
with  all  other  whys  as  an  idle  and  irrational  question  ; 
but  clearer  views  as  to  the  how  of  these  modes  of 
perception  will  undoubtedly  come  with  the  growth  of 
physiological  psychology,  and  with  increased  observa- 
tion of  the  manner  in  which  the  lower  forms  of  life 
and  young  children  discriminate  perceptions. 

Of  time  as  of  space  we  cannot  assert  a  real  exis- 
tence; it  is  not  in  things,  but  is  our  mode  of  perceiving 
them.  As  we  cannot  postulate  anything  of  the  beyond 
of  sense-impression,  so  we  cannot  attribute  time 
directly  or  indirectly  to  the  supersensuous.  Like 
space,  it  appears  to  us  as  one  of  the  plans  on  which 
that  great  sorting-machine,  the  human  perceptive 
faculty,  arranges  its  material.  Through  the  doorways 
of  perception,  through  the  senses  of  man,  crowd,  in 
our  waking  state,  sense-impression  upon  sense-impres- 
sion ;  sound  and  taste,  colour  and  warmth,  hardness  and 
weight — all  the  various  elements  of  an  infinite  variety 
of  phenomena,  all  that  forms  for  us  reality — crush 
through  the  open  gateways.  The  perceptive  faculty, 
sharpened  by  long  centuries  of  natural  selection,1  sorts 

1  We  cannot  infer  the  time  and  space-modes  of  perception  except  for 
perceptive  faculties,  more  or  less  similar  to  our  own.  The  order  of 


SPACE   AND   TIME.  221 

and  sifts  all  this  mass  of  sense-impressions,  giving  to 
each  a  place  and  an  instant.  Thus  the  magnitude  of 
space  and  time  depends  upon  no  external  world 
independent  of  ourselves,  but  on  the  complexity  of 
our  sense-impressions,  immediate  and  stored.  Infinity 
of  space  or  eternity  of  time  have  no  meaning  in  the 
field  of  perception,  because  the  correlation  and 
sequence  of  our  perceptions,  wide  as  both  un- 
doubtedly are,  do  not  require  these  enormous  frames 
to  exhibit  them.  Where  the  senses  perceive  no 
object,  there  there  is  no  space,  for  there  no  groups  of 
sense-impressions  are  to  be  distinguished.  Where  I 
can  no  longer  carry  back  the  sequence  of  phenomena, 
there  time  ceases  for  me  because  I  no  longer  require 
it  to  distinguish  an  order  of  events.  Let  the  reader 
endeavour  to  realize  empty  time,  or  time  with  no 
sequence  of  events,  and  he  will  soon  be  ready  to 
grant  that  time  is  a  mode  of  his  own  perception  and 
is  limited  by  the  contents  of  his  experience.1  Thus 
the  moments  devoted  to  wonder  over  the  eternities 
of  time  are  as  ill-spent  as  those  consumed  in  ponder- 
ing on  the  immensities  of  space  (p.  188).  They  are 
like  moments  employed  in  examining  the  frame  of  a 
picture  and  not  its  contents,  in  admiring  the  constitu- 
tion of  the  artist's  canvas  and  not  his  genius.  The 

phenomena  in  both  space  and  time  is  essentially  conditioned  by  the 
intensity  and  quality  of  the  consciousness  (p.  101). 

1  It  may  well  be  questioned  whether  anything  that  falls  outside 
human  experience  can  be  said  to  have  existed  in  perceptual  time.  Such 
time  is  essentially  the  mode  by  which  we  distinguish  an  immediate 
sense-impression  from  a  succession  of  stored  sense-impresses  (p.  49). 
That  the  world  has  existed  for  60,000,000  years  is  a  conception,  and  the 
period  referred  to  a  conceptual  rather  than  a  perceptual  one.  The 
future  also  is  a  notion  attaching  rather  to  conceptual  than  to  perceptual 
time.  The  full  discussion  of  these  points  cannot,  however,  be  entered 
upon  at  this  stage. 


222  THE   GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

frame  is  just  large  and  strong  enough  to  support  the 
picture,  the  canvas  is  just  wide  and  stout  enough  to 
sustain  the  artist's  colours.  But  frame  and  canvas  are 
only  modes  by  which  the  artist  brings  home  his  idea 
to  us,  and  our  wonder  should  not  be  for  them,  but  for 
the  contents  of  the  picture  and  its  author.  So  it  is 
with  time  and  space — these  are  but  the  frame  and  the 
canvas  by  aid  of  which  the  perceptive  faculty  dis- 
plays our  experience.  Our  admiration  is  due  not  to 
them,  but  to  the  complex  contents  of  perception,  to 
the  extraordinary  discriminating  power  of  the  human 
perceptive  faculty.  The  complexity  of  nature  is 
conditioned  by  our  perceptive  faculty ;  the  compre- 
hensive character  of  natural  law  is  due  to  the  ingenuity 
of  the  human  mind.  Here,  in  the  human  powers  of 
perception  and  reason,  lies  the  mystery  and  the 
grandeur  of  nature  and  its  laws.  Those,  whether 
poets  or  materialists,  who  do  homage  to  nature  as  the 
sovereign  of  man,  too  often  forget  that  the  order  and 
complexity  they  admire  are  at  least  as  much  a  pro- 
duct of  man's  perceptive  and  reasoning  faculties  as 
are  their  own  memories  and  thoughts. 

§  13. — Conceptual  Time  audits  Measurement. 

Time  as  a  mode  of  perception  is  limited,  we  have 
seen,  to  the  extent  to  which  sequences  of  stored 
sense-impresses  can  be  carried  back ;  it  marks  that 
order  of  perceptions  which  is  the  history  of  our 
consciousness.  From  this  it  is  clear  that  perceptual 
time  has  no  future  and  no  eternity  in  the  past.  That 
consciousness  in  the  future  will  continue  as  it  has  done 
in  the  past  is  a  conception,  but  not  a  perception. 
We  perceive  the  past,  but  we  only  conceive  the 
future.  How,  then,  we  may  ask,  do  we  pass  from 


SPACE  AND  TIME.  223 

perceptual  to  conceptual  time,  from  our  actual 
sequences  of  sense-impressions  to  a  scientific  mode 
of  describing  and  measuring  them  ?  Clearly  it  would 
he  extremely  cumbersome  to  measure  time  by  a 
detailed  account  of  the  changes  in  our  sense- 
impressions.  Imagine  the  labour  of  describing  all 
the  stages  of  consciousness  between  breakfast  and 
dinner  as  a  means  of  determining  the  period  which 
has  elapsed  between  the  two  meals !  Yet  this 
method  of  considering  time  brings  out  clearly  how 
time  is  a  relative  order  of  sense-impressions,  and  how 
there  is  no  such  thing  as  absolute  time.  Every  stage 
in  sense-impression  marks  in  itself  an  epoch  of  time, 
and  may  form  the  basis  of  a  measurement  of  time  for 
an  individual.  "  I  am  sleepy,  it  is  time  to  go  to  bed," 
says  the  child ;  "  I  am  hungry,  it  is  time  to  eat,"  says 
the  savage,  and  both  without  thinking  of  the  clock  or 
the  sun.  Fortunately  for  us  we  are  not  compelled  to 
measure  time  by  a  description  of  the  sequence  of 
states  of  consciousness.  There  are  certain  sense- 
impressions  which  experience  has  shown  us  repeat 
themselves,  and  which,  on  the  average,  correspond 
to  the  same  routine  of  consciousness.  In  the  first 
place,  the  recurrence  of  night  and  day  are  observed 
very  early  in  the  natural  history  of  man  to  mark  off 
approximately  like  sequences  of  sense-impressions  ;  a 
day  and  night  becomes  a  measure  of  a  certain  interval 
of  consciousness.  That  the  same  amount  of  con- 
sciousness can,  at  any  rate  approximately,  be  got  into 
each  day  and  night  by  the  normal  human  being  is 
a  matter  rather  of  experience  than  of  demonstration  ; 
it  cannot  be  proved, — it  can  only  be  felt. 

Very  much  the  same  holds  for  the  smaller  intervals 
of  time.     When  we  say  it  is  four  hours  since  break- 


224  THE   GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

fast,  we  mean  in  the  first  place  that  the  large  hand  of 
our  clock  or  watch  has  gone  round  the  dial-face  four 
times — a  repeated  sense-impression  which  we  could,  if 
we  please,  have  observed.  But  how  shall  we  decide 
whether  each  of  those  four  hours  represents  equal 
amounts  of  consciousness,  and  the  same  amount  to-day 
as  yesterday?  It  may  possibly  be  that  our  time-keeper 
has  been  compared  with  a  standard  clock,  regulated 
perhaps  from  Greenwich  Observatory.  But  what 
regulates  the  Greenwich  clock?  Briefly,  without 
entering  into  details,  it  is  ultimately  regulated  by  the 
motion  of  the  earth  round  its  axis,  and  the  motion  of 
the  earth  round  the  sun.  Assuming,  however,  as  a 
result  of  astronomical  experience,  that  the  intervals 
day  and  year  have  a  constant  relation,  we  can  throw 
back  the  regulation  of  our  clock  on  the  motion  of  the 
earth  about  its  axis.  We  may  regulate  what  is 
termed  the  "  mean  solar  time  "  of  an  ordinary  clock 
by  "  astronomical  time  "  of  which  the  day  corresponds 
to  a  complete  turn  of  the  earth  on  its  axis.  Now,  if 
an  observer  watches  a  so-called  circumpolar  star,  or 
one  that  remains  all  day  and  night  above  the  horizon, 
it  will  appear,  like  the  end  of  his  astronomical  clock- 
hand,  to  describe  a  circle ;  the  star  ought  to  appear 
to  the  observer  to  describe  equal  parts  of  its  circle  in 
equal  times  by  his  clock,  or  while  the  end  of  the 
clock-hand  describes  equal  parts  of  its  circle.  In 
this  manner  the  hours  on  the  Greenwich  astronomical 
cloch,  and  ultimately  on  all  ordinary  watches  and 
clocks  regulated  by  it,  will  correspond  to  the  earth 
turning  through  equal  angles  on  its  axis.  We  thus 
throw  back  our  measurement  of  time  on  the  earth  as 
a  time-keeper  ;  we  assume  that  equal  turns  of  the 
earth  on  its  axis  correspond  to  equal  intervals  of 


SPACE   AND   TIME.  225 

consciousness.  But,  all  clocks  being  set  by  the  earth, 
how  shall  we  be  certain  that  the  earth  itself  is  a  regular 
time-keeper?  If  the  earth  were  gradually  to  turn 
more  slowly  upon  its  axis,  how  should  we  know  it  was 
losing  time,  and  how  measure  the  amount  ?  It  might 
be  replied  that  we  should  find  that  the  year  had  fewer 
days  in  it  ;  but  then  how  could  we  settle  that  it  was 
the  day  that  was  growing  longer  and  not  tlie  year  that 
was  growing  shorter  ?  Again,  it  may  be  objected 
that  we  know  a  great,  number  of  astronomical 
periods  relating  to  the  motion  of  the  planets  expressed 
in  terms  of  days,  and  that  we  should  be  able  to  tell 
by  comparison  with  these  periods.  To  this  we  must 
answer  that  the  relation  of  these  periods  expressed  in 
days,  and  in  terms  of  each  other,  appears  now  indeed 
invariable ;  but  what  if  all  these  relations  are  found 
to  have  slightly  changed  a  thousand  or  five  thousand 
years  hence  ?  Which  body  shall  we  say  has  been 
moving  uniformly,  which  bodies  have  been  gaining  or 
losing  ?  Or,  what  if,  the  ratios  of  their  periods 
remaining  the  same,  they  were  all  to  have  lost  or 
gained?  How  shall  we,  with  such  a  possibility  in 
view,  assert  that  the  hour  to-day  is  the  "  same " 
interval  as  it  was  a  thousand,  or  better  perhaps  a 
million,  years  back  ?  Now  certain  investigations  with 
regard  to  the  frictional  action  of  the  tides  make  it 
highly  probable  that  the  earth  is  not  a  perfect  time- 
keeper, nor  are  we  able  to  postulate  that  regularity  of 
motion,  by  which  alone  we  could  reach  absolute  time, 
of  any  body  in  our  perceptual  experience. 

Astronomy  says  it  is  not  in  me,  nor  do  we  get  a  more 
definite  answer  from  physics.  Suppose  an  observer  to 
measure  the  distance  traversed  by  light  in  one  second ; 
can  this  be  for  all  time  a  permanent  record  of  the  length 

16 


226  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

of  a  second?  Another  observer  a  thousand  years 
after  measures  again  the  distance  for  one  of  his 
seconds,  and  finds  it  differs  from  the  old  determina- 
tion. What  shall  he  infer  ?  Is  the  speed  of  light 
really  variable,  has  the  planetary  system  reached  a 
denser  portion  of  the  ether,  has  the  second  changed 
its  value,  or  does  the  fault  lie  with  one  or  other 
observer  ?  *  No  more  than  the  astronomer  can  the 
physicist  provide  us  with  an  absolute  measure  of  time. 
So  soon  as  we  grasp  this  we  appear  to  lose  our  hold 
on  time.  The  earth,  the  sole  clock  by  which  we  can 
measure  millions  of  years,  fails  us  when  we  once 
doubt  its  regularity.  Why  should  a  year  now 
represent  the  same  amount  of  consciousness  as  it 
might  have  done  a  few  million  years  back?  The 
absolutely  uniform  motion  by  which  alone  we  could 
reach  an  absolute  measurement  of  time  fails  us  in 
perceptual  experience.  It  is,  like  the  geometrical 
surface,  reached  in  conception,  and  in  conception  only, 
by  carrying  to  a  limit  there  the  approximate  same- 
ness and  uniformity  which  we  observe  in  certain 
perceptual  motions.  Absolute  intervals  of  time  are 
the  conceptual  means  by  which  we  describe  the 
sequence  of  our  sense-impressions,  the  frame  into 
which  we  fit  the  successive  stages  of  the  sequence, 
but  in  the  world  of  sense-impression  itself  they  have 
no  existence. 

Newton,  defining  what  we  term  here  conceptual 
time,  tells  us  :— 

"  That  absolute,  true,  and  mathematical  time  is 
conceived  as  flowing  at  a  constant  rate,  unaffected 
by  the  speed  or  slowness  of  the  motions  of  material 
things.33 

Clearly  such  time  is  a  pure  ideal,  for  how  can  we 


SPACE  AND   TIME.  22/ 

measure  it  if  there  be  nothing  in  the  sphere  of  per- 
ception which  we  are  certain  flows  at  a  constant 
rate  ?  "  Uniform  flow,"  like  any  other  scientific 
concept,  is  a  limit  drawn  in  imagination — in  this  case, 
from  the  actual  "  speed  or  slowness  of  the  motions  of 
material  things."  But,  like  other  scientific  concepts, 
it  is  invaluable  as  a  shorthand  method  of  description. 
Perceptual  time  is  the  pure  order  in  succession  of  our 
sense-impressions  and  involves  no  idea  of  absolute 
interval.  Conceptual  time  is  like  a  piece  of  blank 
paper  ruled  with  lines  at  equal  distances,  upon  which 
we  may  inscribe  the  sequence  of  our  perceptions,  both 
the  known  sequence  of  the  past  and  the  predicted 
sequence  of  the  future.  The  fact  that  upon  the  ruled 
lines  we  have  inscribed  some  standard  recurring 
sense-impression  (as  the  daily  transit  of  a  heavenly 
body  over  the  meridian  of  Greenwich),  must  not  be 
taken  as  signifying  that  states  of  consciousness 
succeed  each  other  uniformly,  or  that  a  "uniform 
flow "  of  consciousness  is  in  some  way  a  measure  of 
absolute  time.  It  denotes  no  more  than  this :  that 
from  noon  to  noon  the  average  human  being  experi- 
ences much  the  same  sequence  of  sense-impressions, 
and  thus  the  same  space  in  our  conceptual  time-log 
may  be  conveniently  allotted  for  their  inscription. 
Above  all,  it  must  not  lead  us  to  project  the  absolute 
time  of  conception  into  a  reality  of  perception  ;  the 
blank  divisions  at  the  top  and  bottom  of  our  con- 
ceptual time-log  are  no  justification  for  rhapsodies 
on  the  past  or  future  eternities  of  time,  for  rhapso- 
dies which,  confusing  conception  and  perception 
claim  for  these  eternities  a  real  meaning  in  the  world 
of  phenomena,  in  the  field  of  sense-impression. 


228  THE   GRAMMAR   OF  SCIENCE. 

§  1 4. — Concluding  Remarks  on  Space  and  Time. 

The  reader  who  has  recognized  in  perceptual  space 
and  time  the  modes  in  which  we  distinguish  groups  of 
sense-impressions,  who  has  grasped  that  infinities  and 
eternities  are  products  of  conception,  not  actualities 
of  the  real  world  of  phenomena,  will  be  prepared  to 
admit  the  important  conclusions  which  flow  from 
these  views  for  both  practical  and  mental  life.  If  the 
individual  carries  space  and  time  about  with  him  as 
his  modes  of  perception,  we  see  that  the  field  of 
miracle  is  transferred  from  an  external  mechanical 
world  of  phenomena  to  the  individual  perceptive 
faculty.  The  knowledge  of  this  in  itself  is  no  small 
gain  to  clearing  up  our  ideas  with  regard  to  such 
recrudescences  of  superstition  as  spiritualism  and 
theosophy.  If  space  and  time  are  to  be  annihilated, 
it  cannot  be  done  once  for  all,  but  it  must  be  done 
for  each  individual  perceptive  faculty.  When,  for 
example,  theosophists  tell  us  that,  putting  aside  the 
bondages  of  space  and  time,  they  can  communicate 
with  adepts  from  Central  Asia  in  London  drawing- 
rooms,  they  are  really  saying  that  their  own  percep- 
tive faculties  can  distinguish  groups  of  sense-im- 
pressions in  other  than  those  modes  of  space  and 
time  which  are  characteristic  of  the  normal  perceptive 
faculty.  They  have  not  abrogated  our  space  and 
time,  only  their  own.  They  are  merely  declaring 
that  their  modes  of  perception  are  different  from  ours. 
If  we  find  from  long  experience  that  there  is  in  man 
a  normal  perceptive  faculty  which  co-ordinates  sense- 
impressions  in  space  and  time  in  the  same  uniform 
manner,  then  we  are  justified  in  classifying  the 
infinitesimal  minority  who  suffer  from  abnormal 
modes  of  perception  with  the  ecstatic  and  the  insane. 


SPACE  AND   TIME.  229 

Through  sickness  they  have  lost,  or  through  atavistic 
tendencies  they  have  failed  to  develop,  the  normal 
perceptive  faculty  of  a  healthy  man — the  mens  sana 
in  corpore  sano. 

No  less  valuable  is  the  conclusion  that  it  is  idle  to 
speak  of  anything  as  existing  in  space  or  as  happening 
in  time  which  cannot  be  the  material  of  perception. 
Whatever  by  its  nature  lies  beyond  sense-impression, 
beyond  the  sphere  of  perception,  can  neither  exist  in 
space  nor  happen  in  time.  Thus  the  scientific  con- 
ception of  causation,  or  that  of  uniform  antecedence, 
cannot  with  any  meaning  be  postulated  of  it — a  result 
we  have  already  reached  from  a  slightly  different 
standpoint  (pp.  152  and  186).  Indeed,  it  seems  to 
me  that,  with  a  clear  appreciation  of  space  and  time 
as  modes  of  perception,  most  phases  of  superstition 
and  obscurity  fade  into  nothingness,  while  the  field 
to  which  the  category  of  knowledge  applies  is  seen  to 
be  sharply  defined. 

SUMMARY. 

1.  Space  and  Time  are  not  realities  of  the  phenomenal  world,  but  the 
modes  under  which  we  perceive  things  apart.     They  are  not  infinitely 
large  nor  infinitely  divisible,  but  are  essentially  limited  by  the  contents 
of  our  perception. 

2.  Scientific  concepts  are,  as  a  rule,  limits  drawn  in  conception  to 
processes  which   can   be  started   but  not  carried   to  a  conclusion  in 
perception.      The  historical  origin  of  the  concepts  of  geometry  and 
physics  can  thus  be  traced.     Concepts   such  as  geometrical   surface, 
atom,  and  ether,  are  not  asserted  by  science  to  have  a  real  existence  in 
or  behind  phenomena,  but  are  valid  as  shorthand  methods  of  describing 
the  correlation  and  sequence  of  phenomena.      From  this  standpoint 
conceptual  space  and  time  can  be  easily  appreciated,  and  the  danger 
avoided  of  projecting  their  ideal  infinities  and  eternities  into  the  real 
world  of  perceptions. 


230  THE   GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

LITERATURE. 

HUME,  DAVID. — A  Treatise  on  Human  Nature  (1739),  book  i.  part  ii. 

Of  the  Ideas  of  Space  and  Time.    Green  and  Grose :  Works  of 

Hume,  vol.  i.  pp.  334-371. 
KANT,  IMMANUEL.— Kritik  der  reinen  Vernunft  (1781).     Elementar- 

lehre,  i.  Theil.     Sammtliche  Werke,  Ausgabe  v.  Hartenstein,  Bd. 

iii.  S.  58-80. 

A  good  account  of  Kant's  views  will  be  found  in  Kuno  Fischer's 
Geschichte  der  Philosophic,  Bd.  iii.  S.  312-349.  A  brief  description  is 
given  on  pp.  218-20  of  Schwegler's  Handbook  of  the  History  of  Philo- 
sophy, translated  by  J.  H.  Stirling,  Edinburgh,  1879. 

None  of  the  geometrical  or  physical  text-book  writers  have  hitherto 
ventured  to  discuss  how  the  conceptual  space  and  time  which  are  at  the 
basis  of  their  investigations  are  related  to  perceptual  experience.  The 
reader  will,  however,  find  much  that  is  valuable  in  Clifford's  Philosophy 
of  the  Pure  Sciences  (1873),  Lectures  and  Essays,  vol.  i.  pp.  254-340, 
and  in  his  "Of  Boundaries  in  General,"  Seeing  and  Thinking  (1880), 
pp.  127-156. 

A  criticism  of  Hume's  views  will  be  found  on  pp.  230-254  of  Green's 
"  General  Introduction  "  to  Hume's  Works,  vol.  i.,  while  Kant's  doc- 
trines have  been  attacked  by  both  Trendelenburg  and  Uebervveg. 
References  are  given  in  vol.  ii.  pp.  158,  330,  and  525  of  the  latter 
writer's  History  of  Philosophy,  London,  1874. 

A  good  deal  that  is  suggestive  with  regard  not  only  to  space  and  time, 
but  position  and  motion,  may  still  with  caution  be  extracted  from  the 
Physics  of  Aristotle.  See  especially  E.  Zeller,  Die  Philosophie  der 
Griechen  ii.  Theil,  2  Abth.  S.  384-408,  and  Ueberweg  loc.  «'/.,  vol.  i. 
pp.  163-6.  The  reader  must  not  be  discouraged  by  the  contempt 
expressed  for  Aristotle's  ideas  of  space  and  motion  in  George  Henry 
Lewes's  Aristotle  :  a  Chapter  from  the  History  of  Science,  London, 
1864  (p.  128  et  seq,}. 


CHAPTER  VI. 
THE  GEOMETRY  OF  MOTION. 

§   i . — Motion  as  the  Mixed  Mode  of  Perception. 

WE  have  seen  in  the  previous  chapter  that  there  are 
two  modes  under  which  the  perceptive  faculty  dis- 
criminates between  groups  of  perceptions,  namely, 
those  of  space  and  time.  The  combination  of  these 
two  modes,  to  which  we  give  the  various  names  of 
change,  motion,  growth,  evolution,  may  be  said  to  be 
the  mixed  mode  under  which  all  perception  takes 
place.1  Science,  accordingly,  if  we  except  special 
branches  treating  of  the  modes  under  which  we 
perceive  and  think,  is  essentially,  as  a  description  of 
the  contents  of  perception,  a  description  of  change  or 
variation.  In  order  to  draw  a  mental  picture  of  the 
universe,  to  map  out  in  broad  outline  its  character- 
istics, science  has  introduced  the  conception  of 
geometrical  forms ;  in  order  to  describe  the  sequence 
of  perceptions,  to  form  a  sort  of  historical  atlas  of  the 
universe,  science  has  introduced  the  conception  of 
geometrical  forms  changing  with  absolute  time.  The 

1  Trendelenburg  sees  in  real  or  constructive  motion  the  basis  of  all 
perception  and  conception.  He  tries  to  show  that  the  conception  of 
motion  does  not  require  the  notions  of  space  and  time,  which  he  asserts 
flow  from  the  conception  of  motion  itself.  I  do  not  think  he  is  successful 
in  this,  but  his  attempt  is  instructive  as  showing  how  essentially  per- 
ception and  conception  involve  motion.  (See  his  Logische  Untersuch- 
ungen"  2nd  edition,  Bd.  i.,  chaps,  v.-viii.,  Leipzig,  1862.) 


232  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

analysis  of  this  conception  is  what  we  term  the 
Geometry  of  Motion.  The  geometry  of  motion  is 
thus  the  conceptual  mode  in  which  we  classify  and 
describe  perceptual  change.  Its  validity  depends  not 
upon  its  corresponding  absolutely  to  anything  in  the 
real  world — a  correspondence  at  once  rebutted  by  the 
ideal  character  of  geometrical  forms— but  upon  the 
power  it  gives  us  of  briefly  resuming  the  facts  of 
perception  or  of  economizing  thought.1  The  geo- 
metry of  motion  has  been  technically  termed  kine- 
matics^ from  the  Greek  word  /clvi^a,  signifying  a 
movement.  It  teaches  us  how  to  represent  and 
measure  motion  in  the  abstract,  without  reference  to 
those  particular  types  of  motion  which  a  long  series 
of  experiments,  and  much  careful  observation  of  the 
world  of  phenomena,  have  shown  us  are  best  fitted  to 
exhibit  the  special  changes  in  the  sphere  of  percep- 
tion. When  we  apply  what  we  have  learnt  in  the 

1  The  term  economy  of  thought,  originally  due,  I  think,  to  Professor 
Mach,  of  Prague,  embraces  in  itself  a  very  important  series  of  ideas. 
Its  value  is  much  more  significant,  if  we  remember  how  thought 
depends  on  stored  sense-impresses,  and  that  it  is  difficult  to  deny  to 
these  and  to  their  nexus — association — a  physical  or  kinetic  aspect  (p.  51). 
The  economy  of  thought  thus  becomes  closely  associated  with  an 
economy  of  energy.  The  range  of  perceptions  is  so  wide,  their 
sequences  so  varied  and  complex,  that  no  single  brain  could  retain  a 
clear  picture  of  the  relationship  of  the  smallest  group  but  for  the  short- 
hand descriptions  provided  by  the  conceptions  of  science.  Dr.  Wallace, 
in  his  Darwinism,  declares  that  he  can  find  no  origin  for  the  existence 
of  pure  scientists,  especially  mathematicians,  on  the  hypothesis  of  natural 
selection.  If  we  put  aside  the  fact  that  great  power  in  theoretical  science 
is  correlated  with  other  developments  of  increasing  brain-activity,  we  may, 
I  think,  still  account  for  the  existence  of  pure  scientists  as  Mr.  Wallace 
would  himself  account  for  that  of  worker-bees.  Their  functions  may 
not  fit  them  individually  to  survive  in  the  struggle  for  existence,  but 
they  are  a  source  of  strength  and  efficiency  to  the  society  which  produces 
them.  The  solution  of  Mr.  Wallace's  difficulty  lies,  I  think,  in  the  social 
advantage  of  science  as  an  economy  of  intellectual  energy. 


THE  GEOMETRY   OF   MOTION.  233 

geometry  of  motion  to  those  particular  types  of 
motion — natural  types  as  they  may  be  conveniently 
called — and  investigate  how  they  are  correlated,  then 
we  are  led  to  the  so-called  Laws  of  Motion  and  to 
those  conceptions  of  Mass  and  Force  *  upon  which  our 
physical  description  of  the  universe  depends.  These 
will  form  the  topics  of  succeeding  chapters,  but,  in 
order  to  see  our  way  more  clearly  through  that  maze 
of  metaphysics  which  at  present  obstructs  the  entry 
to  physics,  we  must  devote  some  space  to  a  discussion 
of  the  elementary  notions  of  kinematics. 

§  2. — Conceptual  Analysis  of  a  Case  of  Perceptual  Motion. 
Point-Motion. 

We  shall,  I  think,  best  obtain  clear  ideas  of  motion 
by  examining  some  familiar  case  of  physical  change 
of  position  and  endeavouring  to  analyze  it  into  simple 
types  which  may  be  easily  discussed  by  the  aid  of 
geometrical  ideals.  Let  us  take,  for  instance,  the 
case  of  a  man  ascending  a  staircase  which  may  have 
several  landings  and  turns  in  its  course.  The  changes 
in  our  sense-impressions  during  the  man's  ascent  are 
of  an  extremely  complex  character,  and  we  see  at  once 
how  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  it  would  be  to  describe 
all  that  we  perceive.  Not  only  the  position  of  the 
man  on  the  staircase  changes,  but  his  hands  and  his 
legs  are  perpetually  varying  their  position  with  regard 
to  his  trunk,  while  his  trunk  itself  turns  and  oscillates, 
bends  and  alters  its  shape.  For  simplification  let  us> 
in  the  first  place,  fix  our  attention  on  some  small 
element  of  his  person  ;  let  us  follow  with  our  eye,  for 
example,  the  top  button  of  his  waistcoat.  Now,  the 

1  Not  force  as  the  cause  of  motion,  but  force  as  a  measure  of  motion. 


234  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

first  observation  that  we  make  is  that  this  button 
takes  up  a  series  of  positions  which  are  perfectly 
continuous  from  the  start  to  the  finish  of  the  ascent. 
There  can  be  no  break  in  this  series  of  positions 
anywhere  throughout  the  whole  extent  of  the  stair- 
case ;  for,  if  there  were  any,  the  button  must,  in 
accurate  language,  have  ceased  to  be  a  permanent 
group  of  sense-impressions,  and  to  be  distinguished 
from  other  groups  under  the  mode  space.  In  ordinary 
parlance,  it  must  "  have  left  our  space  and  come  back 
to  it  again  " — a  phenomenon  totally  contrary  to  the 
experience  of  the  normal  human  perceptive  faculty. 
If  we  cut  the  button  off  the  waistcoat,  we  could  still 
conceive  it  to  move  up  the  staircase  in  precisely  the 
same  manner  as  when  the  man  wore  it, — carried  up, 
let  us  suppose,  by  an  invisible  spirit  hand.  It  will  be 
obvious  that  this  motion  of  the  button,  if  fully  known 
to  us,  would  tell  us  a  good  deal  about  the  motion  of 
the  man.  It  would  not  describe,  of  course,  how  he 
moved  his  legs  and  arms  about,  but  it  would  indicate 
very  fairly  how  long  the  man  took  to  go  from  one 
landing  to  another,  and  when  he  was  going  quickly, 
when  slowly.  But  it  is  still  far  from  clear  how  we  are 
to  describe  the  motion  of  the  button,  so  that  we  could 
conceive  its  motion  repeated  by  aid  of  our  descrip- 
tion. The  button,  like  the  man,  has  many  elements, 
and  the  question  again  arises  how  we  are  to  describe 
the  motions  of  them  all. 

Let  us  now  stretch  our  imaginations  a  little  further  ; 
let  us  suppose  the  staircase  to  be  imbedded  in  a  great 
mass  of  soft  wax,  and  suppose  the  button,  guided  still 
by  the  spirit  hand,  to  move  up  the  staircase  precisely 
as  it  did  on  the  man's  waistcoat,  but  now  pushing  its 
way  through  the  wax.  The  passage  of  the  button 


THE  GEOMETRY   OF   MOTION.  235 

would  now  form  a  long  tube-like  hollow  in  our  mass 
of  wax  extending  from  the  bottom  to  the  top  of  the 
staircase.  This  tube  would  not  necessarily  be  of 
equal  bore  throughout,  because,  owing  to  the  motion 
of  the  man,  the  button  might  occasionally  move  more 
or  less  sideways.  Still,  the  smaller  the  button  the 
smaller  would  be  the  bore  of  the  tube  cut  through  the 
wax.  We  will  now  suppose  a  long  piece  of  stiff  wire 
passed  through  the  tube  and  firmly  fixed  at  its  ends. 
The  wax,  and  even  the  staircase,  may  now  be  removed, 
and  then,  if  a  small  bead  be  slung  on  the  wire  and 
move  up  the  wire  in  the  same  manner  as  the  button 
moved  up  the  tube,  we  shall  be  able  to  describe  a 
good  deal  of  the  motion  of  the  button  from  that  of 
the  bead.  Now  in  conception  we  may  suppose  the 
wire  to  get  thinner  and  thinner,  and  the  bead  smaller 
and  smaller,  till  in  conception  the  wire  ends  in  a 
geometrical  line  or  curve,  and  the  bead  in  a  geo- 
metrical point.  The  motion  of  the  ideal  point  along 
the  ideal  curve  will  represent  with  a  great  degree  of 
accuracy  the  motion  of  an  extremely  small  button  up 
a  tube  through  the  wax  of  an  extremely  small  bore. 
The  reader  may  feel  inclined  to  ask  why  we  did  not 
commence  by  saying :  "  Consider  a  point  of  the  man  ; 
its  motion  must  give  a  curve  passing  from  top  to 
bottom  of  the  staircase."  The  answer  lies  in  this : 
that  we  cannot  perceive  a  point.  In  conception  we 
reach  a  point  by  carrying  to  a  limit  the  perceptual 
process  of  taking  a  smaller  and  smaller  element  of 
the  man,  and  the  stages  we  have  indicated  from  man 
to  button,  bead  and  geometrical  point,  indicate  how 
certain  elements  of  the  perceptual  motion  are  dropped 
at  each  stage,  till  in  conception  we  reach  as  a  limit  an 
ideal  motion  capable  of  being  fairly  easily  described. 


236  THE  GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

The  motion  of  a  point  along  a  curve  is  the  simplest 
ideal  motion  we  can  discuss.  Obviously,  however,  it 
will  enable  us  to  classify  and  describe  with  consider- 
able exactness  a  number  of  our  perceptions  with 
regard  to  the  man's  motion.  Harness  the  button  to 
the  point,  and  the  man  to  the  button  ;  then  if  the 
point  move  along  its  path,  carrying  button  and  man 
with  it,  we  shall  have  a  means  of  describing  a  good 
deal  of  the  real  motion  of  the  man.  When  he  starts, 
when  he  stops,  when  he  goes  fast,  when  he  goes 
slowly,  what  time  he  takes  from  one  landing  to 
another  will  be  deducible  from  the  motion  of  the 
point.  Of  course  this  point-motion  does  not  enable 
us  to  fully  describe  the  motion  of  the  man.  For 
instance,  it  is  conceivable  that  he  may  have  turned 
several  somersaults  in  going  upstairs.  About  such 
eccentricities  in  the  man's  motion  the  motion  of  the 
point  may  tell  us  nothing  at  all.  Even  had  the  man 
been  incapable  of  moving  his  arms,  legs,  head,  &c., — 
had  he  been  a  rigid  body — the  point-motion  would 
have  been  incapable  of  fully  describing  his  motion. 
As  a  rigid  body  the  man  might  have  been  turned 
round  and  about  the  point  without  changing  its 
motion.  Did  he  go  upstairs  backwards  or  forwards, 
head  or  feet  uppermost,  or  partly  in  one,  partly  in 
another  of  these  modes  ?  Clearly  the  motion  of  the 
point  can  tell  us  nothing  of  all  this.  The  motion  of 
the  point  can  tell  us  nothing  of  how  the  man  as  a 
rigid  body  might  have  turned  about  the  point ;  we 
should  want  to  know  at  each  instant  of  the  motion 
which  way  the  man  was  facing,  what  was  his  aspect, 
and  further  how  he  was  changing  his  aspect  or 
rotating  about  the  point.  The  description  of  the 
ideal  point-motion  would  have  to  be  supplemented 


THE   GEOMETRY   OF   MOTION.  237 

by  a  description  of  the  rotating  or  spinning  motion, 
even  if  the  man  were  supposed  to  be  a  rigid  body. 
The  first  type  of  motion,  corresponding  to  change  of 
position,  is  termed  motion  of  translation  ;  the  second 
type,  corresponding  to  the  change  of  aspect  of  a  rigid 
body,  is  termed  motion  of  rotation. 

§  3. — Rigid  Bodies  as  Geometrical  Ideals. 

Just  as  the  former  motion  is  described  by  the  purely 
ideal  conception  of  a  point  moving  along  a  curve, 
so  the  latter  is  also  made  to  depend  on  geometrical 
notions,  namely,  those  of  a  rigid  body  turning  about 
a  line  passing  through  a  point.  What,  in  the  first 
place,  do  we  mean  by  using  the  term  rigid  body  ? 
The  real  man  is  moving  his  limbs  and  bending  his 
body,  and  generally  changing  his  form  at  each  in- 
stant of  the  motion.  Now  the  reader  may  feel 
inclined  to  say :  Replace  the  man  by  a  wooden  table 
or  chair,  and  we  shall  have  a  rigid  body.  But  this  is 
only  popular  language,  and  what  we  are  seeking  is 
an  accurate  or  scientific  definition  of  rigidity.  Such 
a  definition  is  usually  given  in  the  following  words: — 

A  body  is  said  to  remain  rigid  during  any  given 
motion  when  the  distances  between  all  pairs  of  its 
points  remain  unaltered  throughout  the  whole  dura- 
tion of  the  motion. 

But  we  see  at  once  from  this  definition  that  we 
have  replaced  the  real  body,  the  group  of  sense- im- 
pressions which  forms  part  of  the  picture  constructed 
by  our  perceptive  faculty,  by  an  ideal  geometrical 
body  possessing  "  points,"  and  that  it  is  a  property  of 
this  body — existing  only  on  the  ideal  map  on  which 
conception  plots  out  perception — that  we  are  de- 
fining. It  is  quite  true  that  the  geometrical  ideal  of 


238  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE, 

a  rigid  body  is  a  better  description  of  a  wooden  chair 
than  of  the  flexible  body  of  a  man  ;  yet  what  is  a 
"  point "  on  the  chair,  and  what  is  the  "  distance  " 
between  a  pair  of  points  ?  How,  again,  am  I  to 
ascertain  accurately  that  such  distances  remain 
unaltered  during  the  motion  ?  The  very  idea  of 
distance,  when  clearly  appreciated,  involves  the  geo- 
metrical conception  of  points  and  does  not  corre- 
spond to  anything  in  our  perceptual  experience. * 
Rigidity  is  thus  seen  to  be  a  conceptual  limit,  which 
by  concentrating  our  attention  on  a  special  group  of 
perceptions  forms  a  valuable  method  of  classification. 
Although  for  the  description  of  some  types  of 
motion  it  may  be  useful  to  replace  the  wooden  chair 
by  a  body  of  ideal  rigidity  in  our  conceptual  map, 
still  the  physicist  tells  us  that  for  the  purpose  of 
classifying  other  phases  of  sense-impression,  he  is 
bound  to  consider  that  the  chair  is  not  rigid,  and  that 
he  is  perceptually  able  to  measure  changes  in  the 
relative  position  of  its  parts.  He  cannot  describe  the 
mechanical  action  between  different  parts  of  the  chair 
without  supposing  it  elastic,  and  this  elasticity  in- 
volves changes  of  form  in  its  parts.  For  example, 

1  We  speak,  for  example,  of  the  "  distance "  from  London  to 
Cambridge  being  fifty-five  miles,  and  this  is  a  practical  method  of  de- 
scribing the  sense-impressions  of  a  journey  from  one  place  to  the  other, 
and  distinguishing  it  from  a  journey  of  fifty-six  or  fifty-seven  miles. 
But  what  do  we  exactly  mean?  From  Stepney  Church  to  St.  Mary's? 
If  so,  from  which  part  of  one  church  to  which  part  of  the  other  ?  Or, 
again,  is  it  from  the  stone  near  the  gateway  of  Stepney  Church  to  the 
last  milestone  by  St.  Mary's?  If  so,  from  which  side  of  the  one  stone 
to  which  side  of  the  other  ?  In  the  end  we  find  ourselves  driven  to  the 
conception  of  a  point  on  either  stone — no  perceptual  mark  gets  over 
the  difficulty  of  the  where  to  the  where.  We  are  forced  to  conclude 
that  the  idea  of  distance  is  a  conception,  invaluable  for  classifying  our 
experience  but  not  accurately  corresponding  to  a  perceptual  reality. 


THE  GEOMETRY  OF  MOTION.  239 

the  action  between  the  parts  of  the  chair  changes, 
when  it  is  supported  on  its  back  instead  of  its  legs, 
and  thus  the  chair  changes  its  form  in  these  two 
positions.  A  like  change  of  form  will  take  place 
even  if  the  chair  be  only  rotating.  Nor  does  this 
variation  in  shape  merely  result  from  the  chair  being 
of  wood — it  would  be  equally  true  if  the  chair  were 
of  iron,  or  any  other  material.  Change  of  form  is  in 
many  cases  perceptually  appreciable,  and  in  most 
cases  we  can  determine  its  conceptual  value.  Thus, 
so  far  from  the  rigid  body  being  a  limit  which  might 
be  reached  in  perception,  our  whole  perceptual 
experience  seems  to  indicate  that  the  conception 
rigidity  corresponds  to  nothing  in  the  real  world  of 
phenomena.  We  perceive  that  most  bodies  do 
change  their  form,  and  where  we  do  not  perceive  it 
physics  compel  us  to  conceive  it.  Thus  rigidity  is 
very  much  like  the  spherical  surfaces  of  geometry. 
The  latter  correspond  accurately  to  nothing  in  our 
perceptual  experience,  and  we  cannot  even  conceive 
a  continuous  surface  as  a  limit  to  be  reached  in  per- 
ception. Both,  however,  are  alike  valuable  bases  of 
classification.  By  replacing  real  bodies  by  ideal  rigid 
bodies  we  are  able,  although  neglecting  their  changes 
of  form,  to  classify  and  describe  a  wide  range  of  our 
perceptions  of  motion.  To  classify  other  perceptions, 
however,  we  conceive  the  same  bodies  not  to  be  rigid, 
but  varying  in  form  ;  we  actually  measure  the  very 
changes  in  shape,  which  we  purposely  neglected  in 
another  branch  of  our  survey  of  the  physical  universe. 

§  4. — On  Change  of  Aspect  or  Rotation. 

Even  when  we  have  transferred  our  moving  body 
from   the   perceptual   to   the   conceptual   sphere   by 


240  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

postulating  its  rigidity,  we  shall  still  find  the  notions 
of  aspect  and  spin  involve  further  geometrical  con- 
ceptions. Let  us  consider  our  rigid  body  capable  of 
turning  about  a  point,  the  question  then  arises,  How 
can  we  distinguish  one  aspect  from  a  second?  Clearly, 
the  notion  of  direction  involves  that  of  a  line,  but  the 
change  in  direction  in  one  line  will  not  be  sufficient  to 
describe  change  of  aspect.  For  if  C  (Fig.  4)  repre- 
sent the  fixed  point  about  which  the  body  rotates, 
and  A  be  another  definite  point  of  the  body, 
the  line  CA  may  take  up  a  new  position  CA' ; 
but  the  change  in  position  of  CA  to  C  A'  does  not  fully 
determine  the  aspect  of  the  body,  for  there  is  nothing 
to  fix  how  much  the  body  may  have  been  turned 
about  the  line  CA  while  it  was  moving  into  the 
position  CA'.  We  are  compelled,  therefore,  to 
take  a  second  point  B,  and  a  second  direction  CB  ; 
then  if  we  state  the  new  position  CB'  taken  by  CB  as 
well  as  the  new  position  CAf  of  CA,  we  shall  have 
absolutely  determined  the  change  of  aspect  of  the 
body.  The  reader  will  very  easily  convince  him- 
self that  in  giving  the  new  positions  of  two  definite 
points  A  and  B  of  the  rigid  body,  we  have  absolutely 
fixed  its  position.  It  is  easy  to  show  that  this  turn- 
ing of  two  lines  CA  and  CB  into  new  positions  CA' 
and  CB'  may  also  be  described  as  a  turning  of  the 
body  about  a  certain  line  of  direction  CO  through  a 
certain  angle.1  Thus  the  manner  in  which  we  conceive 

1  This  may  be  proved  by  the  aid  of  elementary  geometry  in  the 
following  manner  : — 

Let  the  triangle  CBA  be  displaced  into  the  position  CB'A'.  Join 
the  points  A,  A'  and  B,  B',  and  let  the  mid-points  of  AA'  and  BB  be 
M  and  N  respectively.  Through  C  and  M  draw  a  plane  perpendicular 
to  AA'  and  through  C  and  N  a  plane  perpendicular  to  BB'.  These 
two  planes  meet  in  a  line  passing  through  C,  since  C  is  common  to 


THE   GEOMETRY  OF   MOTION. 


241 


change  of  aspect  to  be  described  and  measured  is  essen- 
tially geometrical,  or  ideal.  It  depends  on  the  con- 
ception of  a  straight  line  fixed  in  the  body  and  fixed 
in  space  about  which  the  body  turns.  It  further 

them  both.  Let  O  be  any  point  in  this  line,  and  join  it  to  M  and  N, 
then  OM  and  ON  are  respectively  perpendicular  to  AA'  and  BB/  In 
the  triangles  AOM,  A'OM,  AM  and  A'M  are  equal,  OM  is  common, 
and  the  angles  at  M  are  right,  hence  it  follows  by  Euclid  i.  4  that  the 
third  sides  OA  and  OA'  are  equal.  For  precisely  similar  reasons  it 


FIG  4. 


follows  that  OB  and  OB'  are  equal.  Hence  the  three  distances  of  O 
from  the  angles  of  the  triangle  ABC  are  equal  to  its  distances  from  the 
three  angles  of  the  triangle  A'B'C  respectively.  Thus  the  two  tetra- 
hedrons with  summits  at  O  and  having  bases  ABC  and  A'B'C  respectively 
are  equal  in  every  respect,  for  all  their  edges  are  equal  each  to  each. 
One  of  them  may  thus  be  looked  upon  as  the  other  in  a  changed  position. 
They  have,  however,  the  same  edge  OC.  Hence  one  tetrahedron  may 
be  moved  into  the  position  of  the  other  by  rotating  it  through  a  certain 
angle  about  the  edge  OC.  That  is  to  say,  the  triangle  CBA  may  be 
turned  into  the  position  CB'A'  by  rotating  it  through  a  certain  angle — 
the  angle  between  the  planes  BOC  and  B'OC — about  the  line  OC. 

17 


242  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

involves  the  conception  of  the  body  turning  through 
a  certain  angle,  but  an  angle  Euclid  tells  us  is  the 
inclination  of  two  lines.  Thus  our  description  of 
change  of  aspect  depends  upon  the  conception  of 
lines  existing  in  the  rigid  body.  It  is  entirely  a 
conceptual  description,  but  like  the  idea  of  point- 
motion,  it  again  serves  as  a  powerful  means  of  dis- 
criminating and  classifying  our  experiences  of  per- 
ceptual motion. 

§  5. — On  Change  of  Form,  or  Strain. 

Thus  far  we  have  analyzed  the  motion  of  our  man 
ascending  the  staircase  by  considering  the  motion  of 
an  ideal  point  of  him,  and  then  treating  him  as  a 
rigid  body  turning  about  this  point,  or  changing  its 
aspect.  It  only  remains  for  us  to  consider  how,  when 
the  point  is  in  any  given  position  and  the  man  has 
any  given  aspect,  we  may  remove  the  condition  of 
rigidity,  and  describe  how  he  can  move  his  limbs 
about,  change  his  form,  or  alter  the  relative  distances 
of  his  parts.  This  change  of  form  is  technically 
termed  strain,  and  its  description  and  measurement 
forms  the  third  great  division  in  the  conceptual 
motion  of  bodies.  Now  we  cannot  in  this  work  enter 
into  a  technical  discussion- of  how  strain  is  scienti- 
fically described  and  measured,  but  for  our  present 
purposes  we  must  ascertain  whether  the  theory  of 
strains  deals,  like  that  of  the  translation  of  a  point 
and  that  of  the  rotation  of  a  rigid  body,  with  con- 
ceptual ideals. 

There  are  two  fundamental  aspects  of  strain 
which  most  of  us  consciously  or  unconsciously 
recognize.  These  are  change  of  size  without 
change  of  shape,  and  change  of  shape  without 


THE  GEOMETRY   OF   MOTION.  243 

change  of  size.  Take  a  thin  hollow  india-rubber 
ball  and  blow  more  air  into  its  interior.  This  will  in- 
crease its  size  without  necessarily  changing  its  shape. 
It  was  spherical  in  shape  and  remains  spherical 
in  shape,  only  it  is  larger.  We  conceive  the  ball 
represented  by  a  sphere,  and  the  change  in  size  will 
depend  upon  the  change  in  diameter.  The  ratio  of 
the  extension  to  the  original  length  of  the  diameter 
may  be  taken  as  a  proper  basis  for  the  measurement 
of  the  strain.  Such  a  ratio  is  termed  a  stretch^  and 
it  may  be  shown  that  for  a  small  increase  of  size 
the  ratio  of  the  increase  of  volume  to  the  original 
volume  is  very  nearly  three  times  the  stretch  of  the 
diameter.1  This  ratio  is  termed  the  dilatation^  and 
is  a  proper  measure  of  the  change  in  size.  Now 
it  is  clear  that  in  order  to  measure  this  change 
of  size,  we  require  to  measure  the  diameters  in 
the  two  conditions  of  the  body.  But  a  diameter, 
although  in  the  conceptual  body  definite  enough  as  a 
straight  line  terminated  by  two  points,  is,  in  this 
accurate  sense  of  the  word,  a  meaningless  term  when 
we  are  dealing  with  a  perceptual  body.  If  the  body 
has  no  continuous  boundary,  but,  according  to  the 
physicist,  is  a  mass  of  discrete  atoms  (Fig.  5),  none  01 
which  we  can  individually  feel,  and  the  mutual  dis- 

1  The  volumes  of  bodies  of  similar  shape  are  as  the  cubes  of  corre- 
sponding lengths.  Hence  if  V  and  V  be  the  old  and  new  volumes,  d 
and  (?  the  old  and  new  lengths,  F'/J7^3/^3,  but  if  s  be  the  stretch 
(c?  —  d)/d=s,  or  (T  =  d(i+s).  A  little  elementary  algebra  gives  us  for  the 
dilatation  d : — 

^  =  -^^=^^=(l+^)3-i  =  3^+3^+^3  =  3^  nearly, 

if  s,  as  in  most  practical  cases,  be  very  small.  For  example,  in  metal 
s= unny  would  be  a  rather  large  value  ;  but  taking  S  =  3*,  we  should  only 
be  neglecting  about  T&S&  °f  ^e  value  of  & 


244 


THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 


tances  of  which  we  cannot  measure,  it  is  clear  that 
the  only  diameter  we  can  be  talking  about  is  that  of 


•*.vt« 

'.V'.V. 


a  conceptual  sphere  by  which  we  have  replaced  the 
perceptual  ball. 

As  it  is  with  change  of  size,  so  it  is  with  change  of 
shape  :  we  are  really  basing  our  system  of  measure- 
ment upon  conceptions,  which  enable  us  to  describe 
and  classify  perceptions,  but  are  not  real  limits  to 
perception.  Change  of  shape  without  change  of  size 
can  be  realized  in  the  following  manner :  Take  a  piece 
of  woven  silk  or  other  slightly  elastic  material,  and 
draw  a  rectangle  upon  it  with  sides  a  few  inches  long 


FIG     6 . 


f/G  .  7 


parallel  to  the  warp  and  woof.  Then  if  such  a 
rectangle  be  held  firmly  top  and  bottom  between  two 
pairs  of  parallel  pieces  of  wood,  or  even  between  the 


THE  GEOMETRY  OF   MOTION.  245 

two  thumbs  and  their  respective  forefingers,  a  slide  of 
the  holders  parallel  to  each  other  will  produce  a 
change  of  form  without  change  of  size.  Now  the 
extent  of  such  a  strain  will  depend  on  the  amount  by 
which  the  warp  and  woof  have  changed  their  inclina- 
tion to  each  other, — that  is  to  say,  on  the  amount 
after  strain  by  which  the  angle  between  them  differs 
from  a  right-angle.  But  this  change  in  angle  only 
becomes  of  meaning  if  we  suppose  the  warp  and 
woof  to  be  straight  lines.  •  In  other  words,  to  get  a 
measure  of  the  strain  we  replace  the  perceptual  warp 
and  woof  by  a  geometrical  network.  Such  a  type  of 
strain  is  termed  a  slide  or  shearing  strain,  and  all 
changes  of  shape  without  change  of  size  can  in  con- 
ception be  analyzed  into  slides.1  Further,  it  may  be 
shown  that  all  changes  of  form  whatever  can  be 
analyzed  into  stretches  and  slides,2  or  into  changes  of 
length  and  changes  of  angle.  But  in  the  cases  of 
both  slide  and  stretch  we  are  thrown  back  on 
geometrical  notions,  when  we  come  to  consider  their 
measurement ;  in  both  cases  we  replace  the  percep- 
tual body  by  a  conceptual  body  built  up  of  points, 
lines,  and  angles.  Thus  the  whole  theory  of  strain 
deals  with  a  conceptual  means  of  distinguishing  and 
describing  perceptions,  and  not  with  something  abso- 
lutely inherent  in  the  perceptions  themselves. 

1  Technically  the  slide  is  not  measured  by  the  change  in  angle  or  by 
the  angle  bac  in  Fig.  7,  but  by  the  trigonometrical  tangent  of  this  angle, 
or  by  the  ratio  of  the  length  be  to  the  length  ba — in  other  words,  by  the 
ratio  of  the  amount  the  woof  has  been  slid  to  the  length  of  the  warp. 

3  An  elementary  discussion  of  strain  will  be  found  in  Clifford's 
Elements  of  Dynamic,  part  i.  pp.  158-90;  or  in  Macgregor's  Kinematics 
and  Dynamic s>  pp.  166-84.  The  reader  may  also  consult  §§8  and  13, 
contributed  by  the  present  writer  to  Chapter  iii.  of  Clifford's  Common 
Sense  of  the  Exact  Sciences. 


246  THE  GRAMMAR   OF  SCIENCE. 

§  6. — Factors  of  Conceptual  Motion. 
We  started  with  a  man  ascending  a  staircase,  and  we 
have  seen  by  our  analysis  that  the  conceptual  descrip- 
tion of  his  motion  requires  us  to  discuss  :  (a)  The 
Motion  of  a  Point,  (b)  the  Motion  of  a  Rigid  Body 
about  a  Fixed  Point,  (c)  the  Relative  Motion  of  the 
Parts  of  a  Body  or  its  Strain.  These  are  the  three 
great  divisions  of  Kinematics,  or  the  Geometry  of 
Motion.  But  in  the  case  of  all  these  divisions  we 
find  that  we  are  thrown  back  on  the  ideal  conceptions 
of  geometry  ;  we  measure  distances  between  points 
and  angles  between  lines,  which  are  not  true  limits  to 
our  perceptual  experience.  Thus  our  ideas  of  motion 
appear  as  ideal  modes,  in  terms  of  which  we  describe 
and  classify  the  sequences  of  our  sense-impressions : 
they  are  purely  symbols  by  aid  of  which  we  resume 
and  index  the  various  and  continual  changes  under- 
gone by  the  picture  our  perceptive  faculty  presents  to 
us.  The  more  fully  and  clearly  the  reader  grasps 
this  fact,  the  more  readily  will  he  admit  that  science 
is  a  conceptual  description  and  classification  of  our 
perceptions,  a  theory  of  symbols  which  economizes 
thought.  It  is  not  a  final  explanation  of  anything. 
Tt  is  not  z.plan  which  lies  in  phenomena  themselves. 
Science  may  be  described  as  a  classified  index  to  the 
successive  pages  of  sense-impression,  but  it  in  nowise 
accounts  for  the  peculiar  structure  of  that  strange 
book  of  life.1 


1  The  extremely  complex  results  which  flow  from  the  simple  basis  of 
the  planetary  theory  have  often  been  taken  as  an  evidence  of  "  design  " 
in  the  universe.  The  universe  has  been  with  much  confusion  spoken  of 
as  the  conception  of  an  infinite  mind.  But  the  conceptual  basis  of  the 
planetary  theory  lies  in  geometrical  notions,  no  ultimate  evidence  of 
which  can  be  discovered  in  the  perceptual  world.  Thus,  while  the 


THE  GEOMETRY   OF   MOTION.  247 

Of  the  three  types  of  motion  just  introduced  to 
the  notice  of  the  reader,  the  first,  or  point-motion,  is 
that  which  for  our  present  purposes  is  most  important. 
The  remainder  of  the  present  chapter  will  therefore 
be  devoted  to  its  discussion.  The  reader  will,  I 
trust,  pardon  its  somewhat  technical  character,  for 
without  this  investigation  of  point-motion  it  would  be 
impossible  to  analyze  the  fundamental  notions  of 
Matter  and  Force,  or  to  rightly  interpret  the  Laws  of 
Motion. 

§  7. — Point-Motion.     Relative  Character  of  Position  and 
Motion. 

Motion  has  been  looked  upon  as  change  of  position, 
but  if  we  try  to  represent  the  position  of  a  point  we 
must  do  so  with  regard  to  something  else.  If  space 
be  a  mode  of  distinguishing  things,  we  must  have  at 
least  two  things  to  distinguish  before  we  can  talk 
about  position  in  space.  Position  of  a  point  is  there- 
fore relative,  relative  to. something  else,  which  for  our 
present  purposes  we  will  suppose  to  be  a  second 
point.  Absolute  position  in  space,  just  as  absolute 
space  itself  (p.  186),  is  meaningless.  Let  the  letter 
P  (Fig.  8)  represent  a  point,  and  the  letter  O  a  point 
from  which  we  are  to  measure  P's  relative  position. 
Now  the  distance  from  O  to  P  would  indicate  for  us 

planetary  theory  answers  our  purposes  of  description,  it  could  never 
have  been  the  conception  upon  which  the  univeise  was  "  designed,"  for 
the  conception  is  nowhere  found  perceptually  realized.  Starting  with 
his  material  endowed  with  all  its  peculiar  properties,  the  carpenter 
makes  for  us  a  box  according  to  our  geometrical  description,  but  in 
reality  not  ultimately  geometrical.  Starting  with  nothing  but  the 
power  of  realizing  conception  in  perception,  he  would  have  produced 
from  our  geometrical  plan  a  geometrical  box.  Geometrical  notions 
could  flow  from  the  material  universe,  but  the  latter  could  not  flow 
from  the  former. 


248  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

the  position  of  P  relative  to  O,  but  in  our  conceptual 
space  we  have  in  general  a  variety  of  other  points  or 
geometrical  bodies  besides  O  which  we  wish  to  dis- 
tinguish from  P,  and  to  do  this  we  must  give  what  is 
termed  direction  to  the  distance  OP,  we  must  deter- 
mine, as  it  were,  whether  it  runs  north  and  south, 
south-west  and  north-east,  or  upwards  and  down- 
wards.1 But  even  this  is  not  enough.  We  must  be 
also  told  the  sense  of  this  direction,  whether,  for 
example,  it  be  op  or  op'  (Fig.  8),  or,  say,  runs  from 
south-west  to  north-east  or  north-east  to  south-west. 
Thus,  if  we  want  to  plot  out  position  in  space  about 


FIG.  8. 


a  point  O,  we  must  do  this  by  measuring  distances 
from   O  in  given  directions  and  with  given  senses. 

1  In  the  conceptual  space  which  corresponds  most  closely  to  percep- 
tual space — so-called  space  of  three  dimensions — we  require,  in  order 
to  mark  the  relative  position  of  all  possible  bodies,  to  start  from  three 
standard  points  (which  must  not  be  in  the  same  straight  line)  in  order 
to  fix  direction.  Throughout  this  chapter  we  shall  understand  by  the 
position  of  a  point  P  relative  to  another  point  O,  the  directed  step  OP, 
and  by  the  motion  of  P  relative  to  O  change  in  this  directed  step.  A 
fuller  account  of  Position  will  be  found  in  the  chapter  under  that  title 
contributed  by  the  author  to  Clifford's  Common  Sense  of  the  Exact 
Sciences. 


THE  GEOMETRY  OF   MOTION.  249 

We  must  know  distance  and  bearing*  from  O  to 
determine  fully  a  point  P.  To  represent  geometrically 
the  position  of  P  with  regard  to  O,  we  may  draw  a 
piece  of  a  straight  line  (of)  having  as  many  units  of 
length  on  our  scale  as  there  are  units  of  distance  from 
O  to  P,  the  line  having  the  same  direction  as  this 
distance,  and  having  an  arrow-head  upon  it  to  mark 
the  sense.  Such  a  line  marking  the  magnitude,  di- 
rection, and  sense  of  P's  position  relative  to  O  is 
termed  a  step.  Such  a  step  tells  us  how  to  shift  our 
position  from  O  to  P.  Step  so  many  feet  with  such 
and  such  a  bearing,  and  we  shall  pass  from  O  to  P. 

If  P  be  in  motion  and  we  know  what  is  the  step 
from  O  to  P  at  each  instant  of  the  motion,  we  shall 
have  a  complete  picture  of  the  sequences  of  positions, 
the  motion  of  P  relative  to  O.  The  reader  must  be 
careful  to  notice  the  relativity  of  the  motion  ;  abso- 
lute motion,  like  absolute  position,  is  inconceivable: 
a  point  P  is  conceived  as  describing  a  path  relatively 
to  something  else.  Thus  the  button  on  the  man's 
waistcoat  moved  relatively  to  the  staircase,  but  the 
staircase  is  rushing  perhaps  1,000  miles  an  hour 
round  the  axis  of  the  earth,  while  the  earth  itself 
may  be  bowling  66,000  miles  an  hour  round  the 
sun.  The  sun  itself  is  moving  towards  the  con- 
stellation of  Lyra  at  some  20,000  miles  an  hour, 
while  Lyra  itself  is  doubtless  in  rapid  motion 
with  regard  to  other  stars,  which,  so  far  from  being 
"  fixed,"  may  be  travelling  thousands  of  %miles  an 
hour  relatively  to  each  other.  Clearly  it  is  not  only 
impossible  to  tell  how  many  thousand  miles  an 

1  With  the  signification  in  which  the  words  are  here  used,  a  line  has 
direction  but  not  bearing.  We  must  add  to  direction  the  conception  of 
sense  before  we  form  the  idea  of  bearing. 


2$0  THE  GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

hour  we  are  each  one  of  us  to  be  conceived  as  speed- 
ing through  space,  but  the  expression  itself  is  mean- 
ingless. We  can  only  say  how  fast  one  thing  is  moving 
relatively  to  another,  since  all  things  whatsoever  are  in 
motion,  and  no  one  can  be  taken  as  the  standard 
thing,  which  is  definitely  "  at  rest." 

Is  it  correct  to  say  that  the  earth  actually  goes 
round  the  sun,  or  that  the  sun  goes  round  the  earth  ? 
Either  or  neither  ;  both  are  conceptions  which  de- 
scribe phases  of  our  perception.  Relatively  to  the 
earth  the  sun  describes  approximately  an  ellipse 
round  the  earth  in  a  focus,  relatively  to  the  sun  the 
earth  describes  approximately  an  ellipse  about  the 
sun  in  a  focus.  Relatively  to  Jupiter  neither  state- 
ment is  correct.  Why,  then,  do  we  say  that  it  is  more 
scientific  to  suppose  the  earth  to  go  round  the  sun? 
Simply  for  this  reason  :  the  sun  as  centre  of  the 
planetary  system  enables  us  to  describe  in  conception 
the  routine  of  our  perceptions  far  more  clearly  and 
briefly  than  the  earth  as  centre.  Neither  of  these 
systems  is  the  description  of  an  absolute  motion 
actually  occurring  in  the  world  of  phenomena.  Once 
realize  the  relativity  of  motion  and  the  symmetry  of 
the  planetary  system  is  seen  to  depend  largely  on  the 
standpoint  from  which  we  perceive  it :  the  planetary 
theory  can  thus  be  easily  recognized  as  a  mode  of 
description  peculiar  to  an  inhabitant  of  a  solar  system. 

§  8.— Position.     The  Map  of  the  Path. 

Relatively  to  O,  then,  our  point  P  describes  a  con- 
tinuous curve  or  path,  and  its  position  at  any  instant 
of  the  motion  is  given  by  the  step  OP.  In  order 
that  the  reader  may  have  a  clearer  conception  of 
what  we  are  considering,  we  will  suppose  the  motion 


THE   GEOMETRY  OF   MOTION. 


251 


to  take  place  in  one  plane,  and  conceptualize  certain 
everyday  perceptions.  We  will  suppose  O  to  be  a 
point  taken  as  the  conceptual  limit  of  Charing  Cross,  P 
to  be  the  point  which  marks  the  conceptual  motion  of 
translation  of  a  train  on  the  Metropolitan  Railway,  and 
the  curve  in  the  above  Fig.  9  to  be  a  conceptual  map 
of  the  same  railway  to  the  scale  of  about  one  furlong 
to  the  T^th  °f  an  inch.  The  points  PI}  P2,  P3,  .  .  . 
Pl6,  mark  the  successive  stations  between  Aldgate  and 
South  Kensington.  Any  step  like  OP6  will  accurately 


determine  a  certain  position  of  the  train  relative  to 
Charing  Cross.  The  reader  must  notice  an  important 
result  about  these  steps.  Suppose  we  had  been 
determining  the  position  of  P6  relative  to  Or — say  St. 
Paul's — instead  of  O.  We  see  at  once  that  there  are 
two  ways  of  describing  the  position  of  P6  relative  to 
O'.  We  might  either  say,  step  the  directed  step 
O'P6,  or,  again,  step  first  from  O'  to  O,  and  then  step 
from  O  to  P6.  These  two  latter  steps  lead  to  exactly 
the  same  final  position  as  the  former  single  step. 
Now  science  is  not  only  an  economy  of  thought,  but, 
what  is  almost  the  same  thing,  an  economy  of 


252  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

language.  Hence  we  require  a  shorthand  mode  of 
expressing  this  equivalence  in  final  result  of  two 
stepping  operations.  This  is  done  as  follows  :  — 


which,  put  into  words,  reads  :  Step  from  O'  the 
directed  step  O'O,  and  then  take  the  directed  step 
O'P6,  and  the  spot  finally  reached  will  be  the  same  as 
if  the  directed  step  O'P6  had  been  taken  from  O'. 
The  reader  must  be  careful  not  to  confuse  this  geo- 
metrical addition  with  ordinary  arithmetical  addition. 
For  example,  if  OO'  were  eight  furlongs,  O'P6  ten 
furlongs,  and  OP6  twelve  furlongs,  then  we  appear  at 
first  sight  to  have  :  — 

8+12=10, 

and  this  is  deemed  absurd.  But  it  is  only  absurd 
to  the  arithmetician.  For  the  geometrician  8,  12,  and 
10  may  be  the  lengths  of  directed  steps,  and  he 
knows  that,  if  he  follows  a  directed  step  of  8  furlongs 
by  one  of  12,  he  may  really  have  got  only  ten 
furlongs  from  his  original  position.  How,  then,  is 
the  arithmetician  limited  ?  Why,  obviously  we  must 
suppose  him  incapable  of  stepping  out  in  all  direc- 
tions in  space,  we  must  tie  him  down  to  motion 
along  one  and  the  same  straight  line.  In  this 
case  a  step  of  8  followed  by  one  of  12  will  always 
make  a  step  of  20,  as  arithmetic  teaches  us  it  should 
do.  Briefly,  the  freedom  of  the  geometrician  consists 
in  his  power  of  turning  corners. 

Let  us  now  go  back  a  little  and  note  that  the 
geometrical  addition  of  steps,  O'O  +  OP6=  O'P6, 
may  be  represented  in  a  slightly  different  manner. 
Let  us  draw  the  line  O'A  parallel  to  OP6  and  P6A 
parallel  to  OO',  then  we  are  said  to  complete  the 
parallelogram  on  O'O  and  OP6,  the  line  O'P6 


THE  GEOMETRY   OF   MOTION.  253 

joining  two  opposite  angles  is  termed  a  diagonal,  and 
we  have  the  following  rule  :  Complete  the  parallelo- 
gram on  two  steps,  and  its  diagonal  will  measure  a 
single  step  equivalent  to  the  sum  of  the  other  two. 
This  rule  is  termed  addition  by  the  parallelogram  law, 
and  we  see  that  the  steps  by  which  we  measure 
relative  position,  or  displacements,  obey  this  law.  In 
itself  it  is  the  same  thing  as  geometrical  addition. 
Its  importance  lies  in  the  fact  that  all  the  concep- 
tions of  the  geometry  of  motion,  displacements, 
velocities,  spins,  and  accelerations  may  be  represented 
as  steps  and  can  be  shown  to  obey  the  parallelogram 
law :  that  is  to  say,  we  add  together  velocities, 
spins,  or  accelerations  geometrically  and  not  arith- 
metically. Although  our  space  may  not  admit  of 
our  demonstrating  this  result  for  all  the  conceptions 
of  kinematics,1  the  reader  will  do  well  to  bear  it  in 
mind,  as  it  is  an  important  principle  to  which  we  shall 
have  occasion  again  to  refer. 

§  9— The  Time-Chart. 

Hitherto  we  have  been  considering  how  the  position 
of  the  point  P  relative  to  O  might  be  determined  at 
each  instant  of  time.  We  want,  however,  to  know 
how  the  position  changes,  and  how  this  change  is  to  be 
described  and  measured.  In  order  to  do  this  we 
must  consider  how  the  displacement  OP6,  for 
example,  changes  to  the  displacement  OP7.  In  our 
geometrical  shorthand:  OP7=-OP6  +  P6P7,  and  the 
step  P6P7  measures  the  change  of  position.  We 
want,  then,  to  ascertain  a  fitting  measure  of  the 

1  For  proofs  see  Clifford's  Elements  of  Dynamic,  "  Velocities,  "p.  59, 
"  Spins,"  pp.  123-4. 


254  THE   GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

manner  in  which  this  change  varies  with  the  time. 
To  enable  the  reader  better  to  conceive  our  purpose 
we  will  try  to  turn  into  geometry  a  column  of 
Bradshaw,  or,  more  definitely,  a  portion  of  a  time-table 
of  the  Metropolitan  Railway,  corresponding  to  the 
stations  marked  in  Fig.  9.  Down  the  left-hand  side  of 
Fig.  10  are  placed  the  names  of  the  stations  represented 
in  Fig.  9  by  the  points  PT,  P2,  P3,  P4,  .  .  .  Pl6.  These 
are  placed,  as  in  Bradshaw,  against  a  vertical  line, 
but  we  will  somewhat  improve  on  his  arrangement. 
He  puts  the  stations  at  equal  distances  below  each 
other,  and  gives  no  hint  as  to  the  distance  between 
each  pair  of  them.  Now  we  will  place  them  at  such 
distances  along  the  vertical  from  each  other  that  every 
•^th  of  an  inch  represents  a  furlong,  or  fths  of  an  inch 
represents  a  mile,  so  that  an  inch-scale  applied  to  the 
vertical  ought  theoretically  to  determine  the  par- 
liamentary fare  between  any  two  stations.  In  the 
next  place,  we  will  place  off  (or  plot  off,  as  it  is  termed) 
on  the  horizontal  line  through  Pz  the  number  of 
minutes  that  the  train  takes  from  Aldgate  to  each  of 
the  other  stations.  Thus  the  times  of  a  vertical 
column  of  Bradshaw  are  in  our  case  arranged  hori- 
zontally. But  we  will  place  these  times  at  such 
distances  that  ^th  of  an  inch  shall  represent  a 
minute,  or  the  minutes  between  any  pair  of  stations 
may  be  at  once  read  off  by  aid  of  an  inch-scale.  To 
connect  each  station  with  its  corresponding  time  we 
will  draw  a  horizontal  line  PQ  through  the  station, 
and  vertical  line  tQ  through  the  corresponding  time. 
These  meet  in  a  point  Q,  and  we  obtain  a  series  of 
points  Qx,  Q2,  .  .  .  QI6,  in  our  diagram,  corresponding 
to  the  sixteen  stations.  Now  at  first  sight  it  may 
seem  rather  an  inconvenient  form  of  Bradshaw^  when 


£ 

<4 

-*. 

i 

t 

* 

<s 

/ 

£ 

1 

q 

I 

f 

-/ 

« 

c\ 

9 

/ 

j 

d 

•/ 

s 

4 

y 

..  o 

7 

V 

" 

& 

£                *  .& 

~l~    / 

S  &/ 

L.& 

2'/ 

*  54  £      <£    £  0°  c 

5   « 

?c 

• 

M 

5    « 

f  d 

?  = 

? 

Illllil 

^ 

I 

•   1 
(   * 

1 

'  ^ 

^ 

5 

P2 
iQ. 

1 

! 

r 

! 

,  Q 

§ 
i 

^ 

] 

1  1 
^  & 

ii 

\  s 

>        i 

!  1 
N 

| 

1 

,J 

% 

i 

256  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

each  train  takes  up  an  entire  page.1  The  reader, 
however,  must  wait  till  we  have  seen  whether  our 
page  may  not  be  made  to  convey  a  great  deal  more 
information  as  to  the  motion  of  the  train  than 
Bradshavfs  single  column. 

Now  it  is  clear  that  what  we  have  done  for  the 
stations  may  be  done  for  every  signal-box,  Si,  S2,  S3, 
&c.,  on  the  line,  and  not  only  for  every  signal-box, 
but  for  every  position  along  the  whole  line  at  which 
we  choose  to  observe  the  time  at  which  the  train 
passes.  We  thus  obtain  a  series  of  points :  Qx,  Q2, 
Qs>  Q4>  Qs>  Si,  Q6,  Q7,  Q8,  Q9,  Sa,  &c.,  which  are  seen  to 
take  more  and  more  the  form  of  a  curve  as  we  increase 
their  number.  We  will  join  this  series  of  points  by 
a  continuous  line,  and  to  simplify  matters  we  will 
suppose  our  train  to  run  from  Aldgate  to  South  Ken- 
sington without  stopping,  otherwise  our  curve  would 
have  a  small  straight  horizontal  piece  at  each  station. 
This  curve  must  be  carefully  distinguished  from  the 
map  of  the  path  in  Fig.  9  ;  it  tells  us  nothing  about 
the  direction  in  which  the  train  is  moving  at  a  given 
time  —  that  is  to  say,  whether  it  is  going  north- 
wards, or  southwards,  or  what.  But  with  the  help  of 
Fig.  9  it  tells  us  the  exact  time  the  train  takes  to 
reach,  not  only  every  station,  but  every  position 
whatever  between  either  terminus  ;  or,  on  the  other 
hand,  it  tells  us  the  exact  position  for  every  time 
up  to  38  minutes  after  leaving  Aldgate.  How  far 
has  the  train  got  in  26  minutes,  for  example?  To 

1  Such  geometrical  Bradshaws  with,  however,  many  train-curves  on  a 
page,  are  used  by  the  traffic  managers  of  several  French  railways.  I 
possess  a  fac-simile  of  that  for  the  Paris-Lyons  route  containing 
between  30  and  40  train-curves,  and  showing  the  passing  places, 
stoppages  and  speeds  of  the  corresponding  trains. 


THE   GEOMETRY  OF   MOTION.  257 

answer  this  we  must  scale  off  along  the  horizontal 
line,  or  time-axis^  26  eighths  of  an  inch  ;  we  must  then 
draw  a  vertical  line,  striking  our  curve  in  the  point 
M ;  a  horizontal  through  M  strikes  the  vertical  line  of 
stations,  or  distance-axis ',  at  the  point  N  between  Praed 
Street  and  Bayswater,  and  a  scale  divided  into  f ths  of 
an  inch  applied  to  PuN  tells  us  how  many  furlongs 
the  train  is  beyond  Praed  Street.  An  inverse  process 
will  show  us  the  time  to  any  chosen  position  on  the 
distance-axis.  Our  geometrical  time-table,  or  time- 
chart,  as  we  shall  call  it,  thus  gives  us  a  good  deal  more 
information  than  Bradshaw.  It  is  further  clear  that 
such  a  time-chart  can  be  drawn  in  conception  for 
every  point-motion,  and  that,  taken  in  conjunction 
with  a  map  of  the  path,  it  fully  describes  the  most  com- 
plex point-motion.  Hence  the  fundamental  problem 
in  such  motions  is  to  ascertain  the  map  and  the  time- 
chart.1 

§  10. — Steepness  and  Slope. 

If  we  examine  the  time-chart  we  see  that  there 
is  a  considerable  difference  in  its  steepness  at 
different  points,  and  other  motions  would  give  us 
curves  with  still  greater  variations  in  this  respect. 
We  observe  that  if  we  lessen  the  time  between  two 
stations,  say  PIO  and  PU,  we  must  shift  the  line 
QII^H  towards  QI(/IO  and  the  result  is  that  the 
curve  becomes  steeper  between  QIO  and  QII§  On 
the  other  hand,  if  we  lessen  the  space  traversed  in  a 
given  time  the  curve  becomes  less  steep  and  ultim- 
ately quite  horizontal  if  the  train  stops  at  a 
station.  Thus  the  steepness  of  the  time-chart  curve 

1  The  time-chart  has  been  generally  attributed  to  Galilei ;  I  do  not 
know  on  what  authority.  A  speed-chart  occurs  in  his  Discorsi  but  I 
do  not  think  there  is  anything  that  could  be  called  a  time-chart. 

18 


258  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

corresponds  in  some  manner  to  the  speed  of  the  train. 
We  thus  reach  two  new  conceptions  which  need  defini- 
tion and  measurement,  namely,  those  of  steepness  and 
speed.  In  Fig.  1 1  we  have  a  horizontal  straight  line 
AB,  and  a  sloping  line  AC.  Clearly  the  greater 

the  angle  BAC  the  steeper 
AC  will  be,  and  the  greater 
will  be  the  height  we  shall 
ascend  for  the  horizontal 
distance  AB.  If  AB  be  100 
feet  and  CB  the  vertical 
through  B  be  20  feet,  we  shall  have  ascended  20  feet 
for  a  horizontal  100,  or  since  the  steepness  of  AC  is  the 
same  at  all  points,  we  shall  ascend  2  feet  in  10  feet, 
or  200  feet  in  2,000  feet,  or  -J-  of  a  foot  in  I  foot.1 
Now,  by  elementary  arithmetic  the  ratios  of  20  to  100, 
2  to  10,  200  to  2,000,  and  -J-  to  I  are  all  equal  and  may 
be  expressed  by  the  fraction  \.  This  is  termed  the 
slope  of  the  straight  line  AC,  and  is  a  fitting  measure 
of  its  steepness.  The  slope  is  clearly  the  number  of 
units  or  the  fraction  of  a  unit  we  have  risen  vertically 
for  a  unit  of  horizontal  distance.  If  slope  be  a  fit 
measure  of  steepness  for  a  straight  line,  we  have  next 
to  inquire  how  we  can  measure  the  steepness  of  a 
curved  line.  Let  A  and  C  in  Fig.  12  be  two  points 
on  a  curved  line,  the  curve  showing  no  abrupt  change 
of  direction  at  the  point  A.2  Now  draw  the  line, 
or  so-called  chord,  AC  ;  then,  whether  we  go  up 

1  This  statement  depends  on  the  proportionality  of  the  corresponding 
sides  of  similar  triangles  (see  Euclid,  vi.  4). 

2  A  must  be  in  the   "  middle  of  continuous  curvature,"  as  Newton 
expresses  it.     This   condition  is  important)  but  for  a  full  discussion  of 
the  steepness  of  curves  we  must  refer  the  reader  to  pp.  44-7  of  Clifford's 
Elements  of  Dynamic,  part  i. 


THE  GEOMETRY  OF   MOTION. 


259 


the  curve  from  A  to  C  or  along  the  chord  from  A  to 
C,   we  shall  have  ascended  the   same  vertical  piece 
CB    for   the   same    hori- 
zontal distance  AB.    The 
slope  of  the  chord  AC  is 
then    termed    the     mean 
slope  of  the   portion  AC 
of    the    curve,    be- 
cause,  however  the 
steepness  may  vary   ,x' 
from  A    to    C,   the 
final    result   CB    in 
AB  could  have  been  attained  by  the  uniform  average 
slope  of  AC. 

But  this  idea  of  mean  slope  does  not  settle  the 
actual  steepness  of  the  curve,  say,  at  the  point  A. 
Now  let  the  reader  imagine  that  the  curve  AC  is  a 
bent  piece  of  wire,  and  the  chord  AC  a  straight 
piece  of  wire ;  further,  he  must  suppose  small  rings 
placed  about  both  wires  at  A  and  C.  In  conception 
we  will  suppose  the  wires  to  be  indefinitely  thin,  so 
that  they  approach  as  closely  as  we  please  to  the 
geometrical  ideals  of  curve  and  line.  Then  the  ring 
A,  being  held  firmly  at  A  on  the  curved  wire,  let  the 
ring  C  be  moved  along  the  curved  wire  towards  A. 
As  it  moves  the  straight  wire  slips  first  into  the 
position  AC'  and  ultimately,  when  the  ring  C 
reaches  A,  takes  up  the  position  AT.  In  this 
position  the  straight  line  is  termed  the  tangent  to 
the  curved  line  at  the  point  A.  As  the  slope  of  AC 
or  AC'  measures  the  mean  steepness  of  the  curve 
from  A  to  C,  or  from  A  to  C',  so  does  the  slope  of 
the  chord  in  its  limiting  position  of  touching  line,  or 
tangent,  measure  the  mean  steepness  of  an  indefinitely 


260  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

small  part  of  the  curve  about  A.  The  slope  of  the 
tangent  is  then  said  to  measure  the  steepness  of  the 
curve  at  A.  It  is  clear  that  in  this  notion  of  mea- 
suring the  mean  for  a  vanishingly  small  length  of  curve 
we  are  dealing  with  a  conception  which  is  invaluable 
as  a  method  of  description.  It  represents,  however, 
a  limit  which,  no  more  than  a  curve  or  line,  can  be 
attained  in  perceptual  experience. 

§  n. — Speed  as  a  Slope.    Velocity. 

Having  now  reached  a  conception  by  aid  of  which  we 
can  measure  the  steepness  of  a  curve  at  any  point — 
namely,  by  the  slope  of  the  tangent  at  that  point — we 
may  return  to  the  curve  of  our  time-chart  and  ask  what 
we  are  to  understand  by  its  slope.  Turning  to  Fig.  10, 
we  observe  that  the  mean  slope  of  the  portion  Q6Q7 
of  the  curve  corresponding  to  the  transit  from  King's 
Cross  to  Gower  Srteet  is  Q7m  in  Q6m,  or  since  Q7m 
is  equal  to  P6  P7,  and  Q6m  to  tet7,  it  is  P6P7  in 
tetT  But  P6P7  is,  in  a  certain  scale,  the  number  of 
miles  between  the  two  stations,  and  t6  t7  is,  in  another 
scale,  the  number  of  minutes  between  the  two  stations. 
Thus  the  slope,  which  with  one  interpretation  is  a  cer- 
tain rise  in  a  certain  horizontal  length,  is  with  another 
interpretation  a  certain  number  of  miles  in  a  certain 
number  of  minutes.  Now  a  certain  number  of 
miles  in  a  certain  number  of  minutes  is  exactly 
what  we  understand  by  the  mean  or  average  speed 
of  the  train  between  King's  Cross  and  Gower  Street ; 
the  train  has  increased  its  distance  from  Aldgate  by 
so  many  miles  in  so  many  minutes.  The  manner  in 
which  change  of  distance  is  taking  place  during  any 
finite  time  is  thus  determined  by  the  slope  of  the 
corresponding  chord  of  the  time-chart.  The  average 


THE  GEOMETRY  OF  MOTION.  261 

rate  of  change  of  distance,  or  the  mean  speed  fa*  any 
given  interval  is  thus  recorded  by  the  slopes  of  these 
chords. 

It  is  clear,  however,  that  by  varying  the  length  of 
the  chord  Q6Q7 — by  bringing  Q7  nearer  to  Q6  for 
example — we  shall  obtain  different  mean  speeds  for 
different  lengths  of  the  journey  after  passing  King's 
Cross.  The  shorter  .we  take  the  time  the  steeper 
becomes  in  this  case  the  chord,  the  greater  the  mean 
speed.  The  conception  of  a  limit  to  this  mean  speed 
is  then  formed  ;  namely,  the  mean  speed  for  a  vanish- 
ingly  small  time  after  leaving  King's  Cross,  and  this 
mean  speed  is  defined  as  the  actual  speed  of  passing 
King's  Cross.  We  see  at  once  that  the  actual  speed 
will  be  measured  by  the  slope  of  the  tangent  to  the 
time-chart  at  O6,  for  this  tangent  is,  according  to  our 
definition,  the  limit  to  the  chord.  Thus  the  actual 
speed  at  each  instant  of  the  motion  is  determined  by 
the  steepness  at  the  corresponding  point  of  the  time- 
chart,  and  it  is  measured  in  miles  per  minute  by  the 
slope  of  the  tangent  at  that  point.  We  thus  find  that 
our  time-chart  is  not  only  like  Bradshaw,  a  time-table, 
but  is  also  a  diagram  of  the  varying  speed  of  the  train 
throughout  its  journey. 

There  are  one  or  two  points  about  speed  which  the 
reader  will  find  it  useful  to  bear  in  mind.  In  the  first 
place  speed  is  a  numerical  quantity,  it  is  equal  to  a 
slope,  the  unit  of  which  is  one  vertical  unit  in  or  per 
one  horizontal  unit ;  thus  the  speed  unit  is  one  space 
unit  in  or  per  one  time  unit — for  example,  one  mile 
per  minute.  Secondly,  unless  the  time-chart  has  a 
straight  line  for  its  curve,  the  speed  must  continually 
change  its  magnitude  from  one  point  to  another  of  the 
path.  If  the  curve  of  the  time-chart  be  a  straight  line 


262  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 


the  speed  is  said  to  be  uniform,  otherwise  it  is  calle 
variable.  Lastly,  looking  back  at  the  map  of  the  path 
(Fig.  9,  p.  251),  we  see  that,  the  bearing of  the  motion 
as  well  as  the  speed  varies  from  point  to  point  of  the 
path.  Remembering  our  definition  of  tangent  we  see 
that  the  direction  of  the  motion  at  P  is  along  the 
tangent  at  P,  and  further  it  has  a  sense — for  example, 
the  motion  is  from  P6  to  P7  and  not  from  P7  to  P6. 
Now  we  see  that  the  change  in  the  motion  is  of  two 
kinds :  change  in  magnitude,  or  change  in  speed,  and 
change  in  bearing.  In  order  to  trace  this  change 
still  more  clearly  we  form  a  new  conception,  namely, 
that  of  speed  with  a  certain  bearing,  and  this  combi- 
nation of  speed  and  bearing  we  term  velocity.  To 
fully  describe  the  velocity,  say  at  the  position  P6  we 
must  therefore  combine  speed  and  bearing ;  the  speed 
is  the  slope  of  the  tangent  at  Q6  (Fig.  10,  p.  255),  and, 
when  the  units  of  time  and  space  have  been  chosen,  it 
is  solely  a  number ;  the  bearing  is  the  direction  of  the 
tangent  to  the  path  at  P6  (Fig.  9)  together  with  the 
sense,  namely,  from  P6  to  P7.  Like  displacement 
velocity  can  accordingly  be  represented  by  a  step,  the 
magnitude  of  the  step  measures  the  speed,  the  direc- 
tion of  the  step  shows  the  direction  of  the  motion, 
and  the  arrow-head  gives  the  sense  of  the  motion. 

§  12. — The  Velocity  Diagram  or  Hodograph.    Acceleration. 

Now,  as  it  is  awkward  to  have  to  turn  to  two  dif- 
ferent figures — the  map  of  the  path  and  the  time- 
chart — in  order  to  determine  velocity,  we  construct 
a  new  figure  in  the  following  manner :  From  any 
point  I  we  draw  a  series  of  rays,  IVI}  IV2)  IV3>  IV4> 
.  .  .  IVI6)  parallel  to  the  tangents  at  the  successive 
points  Plf  P2,  P3,  .  .  .  P16,  and  we  measure  off  along 


THE  GEOMETRY  OF   MOTION. 


263 


these  rays  in  the  sense  of  the  motion  as  many  units 
of  length  as  there  are  units  of  speed  in  the  motion  at 
these  points.  Each  of  these  rays  will,  by  what 
precedes,  be  a  step  representing  the  velocity  at  the 
corresponding  point  of  the  path.  If  this  be  done  for 
a  very  great  number  of  positions  the  points  VX|  V2| 
V3(  &c.,  will  be  a  series  approaching  more  and  more 
closely  to  a  curve.  This  curve  is  termed  the  hodo- 
graph, from  two  Greek  words  signifying  a  "  descrip- 


15 


FIG    13 


tiori  of  the  path."  The  name  has  been  somewhat 
unfortunately  chosen  as  the  curve  is  not  a  "  descrip- 
tion of  the  path,"  but  a  "  description  of  the  motion  in 
the  path,"  rather  a  kinesigraph  than  a  hodograph. 
Fig.  13  is  supposed  to  represent  the  hodograph  of  the 
motion  dealt  with  in  our  Figs.  9  and  IO.1  Thus  while 

1  The  true  hodograph  would  require  a  great  number  of  points,  such 
as  V,  to  determine  its  shape  at  all  accurately.     The  constant  changes  in 


264  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

the  rays  of  the  map  of  the  path  (Fig.  9,  p.  251)  give 
the  position  of  P  relative  to  O,  the  rays  of  the  hodo- 
graph  give  the  velocities  of  P  relative  to  O.  So  soon 
as  we  are  in  possession  of  the  time-chart  and  the  map 
of  the  path  we  can  construct  this  diagram  of  the 
velocities.  When  constructed  it  forms  an  accurate 
picture  of  how  the  motion  is  changing  in  both  mag- 
nitude and  direction. 

Let  us  now  examine  this  hodograph  a  little  more 
closely.  It  consists  of  a  point  or  pole  I  and  rays 
IV  drawn  from  this  pole  to  a  curve  Vt  V2  V3 
.  .  .  Vl6.  Now  this  is  exactly  what  the  map  in  Fig. 
9  consists  of.  In  that  figure  we  have  a  pole  O  and 
rays  OP  drawn  from  this  pole  to  a  curve  Pj  P2  P3 
.  .  .  Pl6.  In  the  course  of  the  motion  P  passes  along 
the  whole  length  of  this  curve,  and  in  just  the  same 
manner  we  may  look  upon  V  as  moving  along  the 
whole  length  of  the  hodograph-curve.  The  ray  IV 
would  in  each  position  be  the  displacement  of  V  rela- 
tive to  I.  The  question  now  arises  :  Has  the  motion 
of  V  round  its  curve  any  meaning  for  the  motion  of 
P  in  the  path  ?  Suppose  we  were  now  to  treat  the 
hodograph  as  the  map  of  a  new  motion,  and  to  con- 
struct first  the  time-chart  and  then  the  hodograph  of 
this  motion,  what  would  the  rays  of  this  second  hodo- 
graph represent  ?  Now  a  sort  of  logical  rule-of-three 
sum  will  give  us  the  answer  to  this  question.  As  the 
rays  of  the  first  hodograph  are  to  the  map  of  the  path, 
so  are  the  rays  of  the  second  hodograph  to  the  map  of 
V's  motion.  But  we  have  seen  that  the  rays  of  the 
first  hodograph  measure  the  velocities  of  P  in  its 

the  direction  of  the  railway  (see  Fig.  9,  p.  251)  cause  the  hodograph 
curve  to  bend  backwards  and  forwards,  while  the  slight  variations  of  the 
speed  produce  the  tangles  in  the  curve. 


THE   GEOMETRY   OF   MOTION.  265 

path,  and  that  these  velocities  are  a  fitting  measure 
of  how  the  ray  OP,  or  the  position  of  P  relative  to  O, 
is  changing.  Hence  it  follows  that  the  rays  of  the 
second  hodograph  would  measure  the  velocities  of  V 
in  the  first  hodograph,  and  that  these  velocities  are  a 
fitting  measure  of  how  the  ray  IV  or  the  velocity  of 
P  relative  to  O  is  changing.  Thus  the  velocity  of  V 
along  the  hodograph  is  the  measure  of  how  the 
velocity  of  P  relative  to  O  is  changing.  This  velocity 
of  V,  or  change  in  the  velocity  of  P,  is  termed  accelera- 
tion^ and  we  see  that  a  diagram  of  accelerations  may 
be  obtained  by  drawing  the  hodograph  of  the  velocity- 
diagram,  treated  as  if  it  were  itself  the  map  of  an 
independent  motion.  Acceleration  therefore  stands 
in  just  the  same  relation  to  velocity  as  velocity  stands 
to  the  position-step.  As  change  of  position  is  repre- 
sented by  the  steps  drawn  as  rays  of  the  velocity- 
diagram  or  first  hodograph,  so  change  of  velocity  is 
represented  by  the  steps  drawn  as  rays  of  the 
acceleration-diagram  or  second  hodograph.1  What- 
ever may  be  demonstrated  of  the  position-step  and 
velocity  will  still  hold  good  if  the  words  position-step 
and  velocity  be  replaced  by  the  words  velocity  and 
acceleration  respectively. 

§  13. — Acceleration  as  a  Spurt  and  a  Shunt. 

We  must  now  investigate  somewhat  more  closely  this 

notion  of  acceleration  as  a  proper  measure  of  the  change 

in  velocity.     In  a  certain  interval  of  time  the  speed  of 

the  point  P  (Fig.  9,  p.  251)  changes  from  a  number 

1  We  might  proceed  in  the  same  manner  to  measure  the  change  in 
acceleration  by  drawing  a  third  hodograph.  Fortunately  this  third 
hodograph  is  rarely,  if  ever,  wanted.  The  concepts  which  practically 
suffice  to  describe  our  perceptual  experiences  of  change  are  position, 
velocity,  and  acceleration. 


266  THE   GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

of  miles  per  minute  represented  by  the  number  of 
linear  units  in  IV4  to  the  number  of  miles  per  minute 
represented  by  the  linear  units  in  IV5(  the  speed  has 
in  this  case  (see  Fig.  13)  quickened,  or  there  has  been 
what  we  may  term  a  spurt  in  the  speed.  Further,  the 
bearing  of  the  motion  has  changed  ;  instead  of  the 
point  P  moving  in  the  direction  IV4,  it  now  moves  in 
the  direction  IV5,  that  is  to  say,  the  direction  of  the 
motion  has  received  a  shunt.  Thus  the  total  change  in 
the  velocity  of  P  as  it  moves  from  P4  to  Ps  consists  of 
a  spurt  and  a  shunt.  When  a  train  quickens  its  speed 
from  40  to  60  miles  an  hour,  and  instead  of  running 
due  north  runs  north-east,  we  may  describe  its  motion 
as  spurted  and  shunted  ;  technically,  we  say  that  its 
velocity  has  been  accelerated.  Acceleration  has  thus 
two  fundamental  factors — the  spurt  and  the  shunt.1 
If  we  consider  the  perceptual  world  around  us,  it  is 
clear  that  the  spurting  and  shunting  of  motion  are 
conceptions  as  important  for  describing  our  everyday 
experience  as  those  of  the  speed  and  direction  of 
motion  itself. 

We  have  seen  that  the  speed  changes  from  the 
length  IV4  to  the  length  IV5  in  a  certain  time — that 
represented  by  the  length  t^t^  of  our  time-chart  (Fig. 
10).  The  increase  of  speed  per  unit  of  time  (or  the 
ratio  of  the  difference  of  I V5  and  IV4  to  /4£s)  is  termed 
the  mean  speed-acceleration  or  the  mean  spurt  between 
P4  and  Ps.  Further,  the  ray  IV  has  been  turned 
from  IV4  to  IV5,  or  through  the  angle  V4IV5  in 
time  £4£s.  This  increase  of  angle  per  unit  time 
(or  the  ratio  of  the  angle  V4IV5  to  t4t5)  is  termed 
the  mean  shunt^  or  mean  spin  of  direction  between 

1  Spurt  in  scientific  language  includes  a  retardation  or  slackening  of 
speed  as  a  negative  spurt. 


THE  GEOMETRY   OF   MOTION.  267 

the  positions  P4  and  P5.  The  two  combined,  or 
the  mean  rate  of  spurting  and  shunting,  form 
what  is  termed  the  mean  acceleration  during  the 
given  change  of  position,  or  for  the  given  time 
(/4/s).  What  we  measure,  therefore,  in  acceleration 
is  the  rate  at  which  spurting  and  shunting  take 
place.  Turning  to  Fig.  13  the  reader  must  notice 
that  there  are  two  processes  by  aid  of  which  we  can 
conceive  the  velocity  IV4  converted  into  IV5.  In 
the  first  process  we  follow  the  method  just  discussed  : 
we  stretch  IV4  till  it  is  as  long  as  IVs,  that  is,  we 
increase  the  speed  from  its  value  in  the  position  P4  to 
its  value  in  the  position  Ps ;  then  we  spin  this 
stretched  length  round  I  till  it  takes  up  the  position 
IVS.  This  is  the  spurt  and  shunt  conception  of 
acceleration.  In  the  second  process  we  say  add  the 
step  V4V5  to  the  step  IV4  and  we  shall  reach  the  step 
IV5  (pp.  252-3) — that  is  to  say,  we  can  consider  the 
new  velocity  IV5  obtained  from  the  old  velocity  IV4 
by  adding  the  step  or  velocity  V4VS  by  the  parallelo- 
gram law.  The  mean  acceleration  is  in  this  case 
expressed  by  the  step  V4V5  added  in  the  given 
interval  t4t$.  But  if  we  compare  Figs.  9  and  13  as 
maps  for  the  motions  of  P  and  V  we  shall  see  that 
adding  V4VS  in  time  t4ts  corresponds  to  adding 
P4PS  in  time  ^5.  The  latter  operation,  however, 
led  us,  by  aid  of  the  time-chart,  from  the  idea  of  mean 
speed  or  mean  change  in  OP  to  the  idea  of  actual 
speed  or  instantaneous  change  in  OP  at  P4 ;  the 
instantaneous  change  in  OP4  was  in  the  direction  of 
the  tangent  at  P4)  and  was  measured  by  the  slope  of 
the  time-chart  at  Q4  (see  Fig.  10).  In  precisely  the 
same  manner  the  instantaneous  change  in  IV4  will  be 
along  the  tangent  at  V4,  and  will  be  measured  by  the 


THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

slope  of  the  time-chart  for  V*s  motion  at  the  corre- 
sponding point.  Thus  actual  acceleration  appears,  as 
in  our  first  discussion  of  the  matter,  as  the  velocity  of 
V  along  the  hodograph.  Now,  however  close  V5  is  to 
V4)  whether  we  give  a  stretch  and  a  spin  or  add  the 
small  step  V4V5(  the  final  result  of  the  two  processes 
will  be  the  same.  Hence  we  can  either  look  upon 
actual  acceleration  as  the  velocity  of  V  along  the 
hodograph,  or  as  the  combined  mode  in  which  IV  is 
being  actually  stretched  and  spun.1  Either  method 
of  treating  acceleration  leads  to  the  same  result,  and 
both  possess  special  advantages  for  describing  various 
phases  of  motion. 

In  the  first  case  actual  acceleration  is  represented 
by  a  step;  the  bearing  of  this  step  denotes  the  direc- 
tion and  sense  in  which  V  is  moving,  or  the  velocity 
with  which  IV  is  changing  ;  the  number  of  units  of 
length  in  this  step  denote  the  number  of  units  of  speed 
with  which  V  is  moving,  or  the  number  of  units  of  speed 
being  actually  added  per  unit  of  time  in  the  given 
direction  to  the  velocity  IV  of  P.  By  "  added  in  the 
given  direction  "  we  are  to  understand  that  the  incre- 
ments of  velocity  are  to  be  added  geometrically  or  by 
the  parallelogram  law  (e.g.,  IVS=IV4+V4V5  and  this 
however  small  conception  V4V5  may  be  in). 

§  14. — Curvature. 

In  the  spurt  and  shunt  method  of  regarding  accelera- 
tion, on  the  other  hand,  actual  acceleration  will  be 
specified  by  two  factors  :  (i.)  the  rate  at  which  velocity 
is  being  spurted  or  IV  being  stretched  ;  (ii.)  the 

1  What  we  have  here  stated  of  acceleration  applies  just  as  much  to 
change  of  position.  Turning  to  Fig.  9,  we  may  look  upon  the  change 
of  position  of  OP  as  measured  by  the  velocity  of  P  along  its  path  or  by 
the  manner  in  which  OP  is  being  actually  stretched  and  spun. 


THE   GEOMETRY  OF   MOTION.  269 

rate  at  which  velocity  is  being  shunted,  or  IV  being 
spun  about  I  (Fig.  13,  p.  263).  As  in  the  first  case 
the  direction  of  actual  acceleration  at  V4  is  that  of  V4T 
or  the  tangent  at  V4,  it  is  clear  that  as  a  rule  accelera- 
tion will  not  be  in  the  direction  of  velocity,1  but  will 
act  partly  in  the  direction  of  velocity  and  partly  at 
right-angles  to  it.  This  result  is  so  important  that  the 
reader  will,  I  hope,  pardon  me  for  considering  it  from  a 
slightly  different  standpoint.  Let  us  imagine  the  ac- 
celeration to  be  always  such  that  it  never  stretches  IV, 
and  let  us  try  to  analyze  this  case  a  little  more  closely. 


Obviously  if  IV  is  never  stretched,  if  the  speed  is  never 
spurted,  the  point  V  can  only  describe  a  circle,  for  IV 
remains  uniform  in  length.  Uniform  speed  can,  how- 
ever, be  conceived  associated  with  a  point  moving  in 
any  curved  path  whatever.  Let  Fig.  14  represent  this 
path,  and  let  Fig.  1 5  be  the  circular  hodograph,  corre- 
sponding points  of  both  curves  being  denoted  by  the 
same  subscript  numerals  attached  to  the  letters  Pand  V. 

1  At  V3,  for  example,  IV3  appears  to  coincide  with  the  direction  of 
the  tangent  at  V3.  In  this  case  the  whole  effect  of  acceleration  is 
instantaneously  to  spurt  without  shunting. 


2/O  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

Now,  since  all  the  acceleration  in  this  case  depends 
upon  the  change  in  the  direction  of  motion,  or  the 
change  in  the  direction  of  the  tangent  to  the  path,  we 
must  stay  for  a  moment  to  consider  how  this  change  in 
direction,  or  \htbendingtfihz  path,  may  be  scientifically 
described  and  measured.  Now  if  we  pass,  for  example, 
from  the  point  P4  to  P5  on  the  path,  and  P4L4,  PsL- 
be  the  tangents  (p.  259)  at  P4,  Ps  respectively,  then 
the  direction  of  the  curve  has  continuously  altered 
from  P4L4  to  PsL5  as  we  traverse  the  length  P4P5 
of  the  curve.  The  angle  between  these  directions  is 
L4NL5,  and  clearly  the  greater  this  angle  for  a  given 
length  of  curve  P4?5,  the  greater  will  be  the  amount 
of  bending.1  The  amount  of  angle  through  which 
the  tangent  has  been  turned  for  a  given  length  of 
curve  forms  a  fit  measure  of  the  total  amount  of 
bending  in  that  length.  Accordingly  we  define  the 
mean  bending  or  mean  curvature  of  the  element  of  curve 
P4P5  as  the  ratio  of  the  number  of  units  of  angle  in 
L4NL5  to  the  number  of  units  of  length  in  the  element 
of  curve  P4Ps-  Thus  the  mean  curvature  of  any  por- 
tion of  a  curve  is  the  average  turn  of  its  tangent  per 
unit  length  of  the  curve.  From  the  mean  curvature  we 
can  reach  a  conception  of  actual  curvature  as  a  limit 
when  the  element  of  arc  P4PS  is  very  small  in  just  the 
same  manner  as  from  mean  speed  we  reached  a  con- 
ception of  actual  speed.  This  process  of  reaching  a 
limit  in  conception,  which  cannot  be  really  attained  in 
perception,  is  so  important  that  we  will  again  repeat  it 
for  this  special  case,  in  order  that  the  reader  may  have 

'  We  are  supposing  here  that  the  direction  of  bending  between  P4 
and  P5  does  not  change,  that  the  curve  is  not  like  this  :  CO.  We  can 
always  insure  that  no  such  change  takes  place  by  taking  a  sufficiently 
small  length  of  arc- 


THE   GEOMETRY  OF   MOTION. 


271 


little  difficulty  henceforth  in  discovering  and  discussing 
such  limits  for  himself.  Let  us  accordingly  suppose  the 
distances  between  the  points  Px,  P2,  P3,  ,  .  .  P6  plotted 
off  (Fig.  16)  down  a  vertical  line  as  in  the  time-chart 
of  Fig.  10  (p.  255).  Along  the  horizontal  line  PjM6 
instead  of  assuming  units  of  length  to  represent  units  of 
time,  let  them  represent  units  of  angle,1  and  let  the 


FIC.I6. 

number  of  units  taken  from  PT  represent  successively 
the  number  of  units  of  angle  between  the  tangents 
P2L2,  P3L3)P4L4,  &c.,  in  Fig.  I4(p.  269), and  the  tangent 

1  According  to  Euclid  iii.  29,  and  vi.  33,  the  angles  at  the  centre 
of  a  circle  which  stand  on  equal  arcs  are  themselves  equal  j  if  we  double 
or  treble  the  arc  we  must  double  or  treble  the  angle ;  the  arc  is  thus 
seen  to  be  a  fit  measure  of  the  angle.  Further  (Clifford's  Common  Sense 
of  the  Exact  Sciences,  pp.  123-5),  the  arcs  of  different  circles  subtending 
equal  angles  at  their  respective  centres  are  easily  shown  to  be  in  the 


272  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

to  the  curve  at  Px.  Thus  let  PZM4  represent  the  angle 
between  the  tangents  at  Pt  and  at  P4  ;  PiM5  that 
between  the  tangents  at  Px  and  at  Ps  and  so  on.  Now 
draw  in  Fig.  16  vertical  lines  through  the  points  M2> 
M3,  &c.,  and  horizontal  lines  through  the  points  P2, 
P3,  &c.,  and  suppose  these  lines  pair  and  pair  to 
meet  in  the  points  Q2,  Q3,  &c.  We  have  then  a 
series  of  points  Q,  which  increase  in  number  as  we 
increase  the  points  P  in  Fig.  14,  and  in  conception 
ultimately  give  us  the  curve  marked  in  Fig.  16  by 
the  continuous  line.  The  diagram  thus  obtained  is 
a  chart  of  the  bending  or  curvature  in  Fig.  14.  For, 
the  mean  curvature  in  the  length  P4?5  is  the  ratio  of 
the  angle  L4NLS  to  the  length  P4?5  in  Fig.  14,  or, 
what  is  the  same  thing,  the  ratio  of  the  number 
of  units  in  M4M5  to  the  number  in  P4?5  in  Fig.  16.  But 
if  Q4K  be  drawn  parallel  to  M5QS  to  meet  P$Q$  in 
K,  this  ratio  is  that  of  KQ5  to  Q4K,  or  is  the  slope  of 
the  chord  Q4QS  to  the  vertical  line  PXP6.  Thus  the 
slope  of  any  chord  of  the  curvative-chart  to  the  ver- 
tical measures  the  mean  curvature  of  the  corresponding 
portion  of  the  curve  in  Fig.  14.  When  we  make  the 
chord  Q4Q5  smaller  and  smaller  by  causing  Qs  to 
move  towards  Q4,  the  mean  curvature  becomes  more 
and  more  nearly  the  mean  curvature  at  and  about  P4  ; 


ratio  of  their  radii.  If,  therefore,  we  take  as  our  standard  circle  for 
measuring  angles  the  circle  whose  radius  is  the  unit  of  length,  its  arc 
c  for  any  given  angle  will  be  to  the  arc  a  of  a  circle  of  radius  r  sub- 
tending the  same  angle  in  the  ratio  of  I  to  r,  or  in  the  form  of  a  propor- 
tion, c  :  a  : :  I  :  r,  whence  it  follows  that  c  =  a/r,  or  the  circular  measttre 
c  of  any  angle  is  the  ratio  of  the  arc  a  subtended  by  this  angle  at  the 
centre  of  any  circle  to  the  radius  r  of  this  circle.  The  unit  of  angle  in 
circular  measure  will  therefore  be  one  for  which  a  equals  r,  or  which 
subtends  an  arc  equal  to  the  radius.  This  unit  is  termed  a  radian,  and 
is  generally  used  in  theoretical  investigations. 


THE  GEOMETRY  OF  MOTION.  273 

but  as  on  p.  259  the  chord  becomes  more  and  more 
nearly  the  tangent  at  Q4.  As  we  have  defined  actual 
curvature  to  be  the  limit  to  the  mean  curvature  in  a 
vanishingly  small  length  of  curve  beyond  P4  (see 
Fig.  14),  we  see  that  the  actual  curvature  at  P4  is  the 
slope  to  the  vertical  of  the  tangent  Q4S  at  the  corre- 
sponding point  O4  of  the  curvature-chart.  This  slope, 
and  accordingly  the  actual  curvature,  is  therefore  a 
measurable  quantity  at  each  point  of  any  curve.1 

§  15. — The  Relation  between  Curvature  and  Normal 
Acceleration. 

Returning  again  to  Figs.  14  and  15,  we  note  that 
the  mean  curvature  over  the  length  P4?5  is  the  ratio 
of  the  number  of  angle  units  in  L4NL5  to  the  number 
of  length  units  in  the  element  of  curve  P4?5.  Now 
the  speed  in  the  length  P4?5  is  constant  and  equal 
to  IV4  ;  hence  if  the  point  P  traverse  this  length  in 

1  The  mean  curvature  over  any  arc  ab  of  a  circle  centre  O  is  the  ratio 
of  the  angle  between  the  tangents  at  its  extremities,  or — what  is  the  same 
thing,  since  the  tangents  are  perpendicular  to 
the  radii  Qa  and  Ob — of  the  angle  aQb  at  the 
centre  to  the  arc  ab.  But  we  have  seen  in 
the  footnote,  p.  271,  that  the  measure  of  this 
angle  in  radians  is  the  ratio  of  the  arc  ab  to  the 
radius.  Hence  it  follows  that  the  mean  curva- 
ture of  a  circle  is  equal  to  the  inverse  of  the 
radius  (or  unity  divided  by  the  radius).  As 
this  mean  curvature  is  therefore  independent  F I  CM  17 

of  the  length  of  the  arc,  it  follows  that  the 

actual  curvature  at  each  point  must  be  the  same  and  be  equal  to  the  in- 
verse of  the  radius.  Since  the  radius  of  a  circle  can  take  every  value  from 
aero  to  infinity,  a  circle  can  always  be  found  which  has  the  same  amount 
of  bending  as  a  curve  at  a  given  point,  and  thus  fits  it  more  closely  at 
that  point  than  a  circle  of  any  other  radius.  The  radius  of  this  circle 
is  termed  the  radius  of  curvature  of  the  curve  at  the  given  point. 
Hence  the  curvature  of  a  curve  is  the  inverse  of  its  radius  of  curva- 
ture. 

19 


THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

a  number  of  minutes,  which  we  will  represent  by 
the  letter  t,  we  must  have,  since  speed  is  the  num- 
ber of  units  of  length  per  minute,  the  length  P4P5 
equal  to  the  product  of  IV4  and  t  (or  in  symbols 
P4P5=IV4x/).  Further,  since  the  angle  L4NL5  is 
turned  through  by  the  tangent  also  in  time  /,  the 
ratio  of  the  angle  L4NL5  to  t  is  the  mean  rate  at 
which  the  tangent  is  turning  round  in  the  time  t, 
or  is  the  mean  spin  of  the  tangent  (or,  if  the  mean 
spin  be  denoted  by  the  letter  S,  we  have  in  symbols 
L4NL5^=Sx/).  From  these  results  it  follows  at 
once  that  the  mean  curvature  which  is  the  ratio  of 
L4NL5  to  P4PS  must  be  equally  the  ratio  of  the  mean 
spin,  S,  to  the  mean  speed  IV4.  Thus  we  have  di- 
rectly connected  motion  with  curvature. 

Proceeding  in  conception  to  the  limit  we  have  the 
important  kinematic  result  that :  If  a  point  moves  along 
a  curve  the  ratio  of  the  spin  of  the  tangent  to  the  speed 
of  the  point  is  the  actual  curvature  at  each  situation  of 
the  point. 

It  remains  to  connect  this  result  with  the  accelera- 
tion. The  acceleration  in  the  case  we  are  dealing 
with  is  the  velocity  of  V  along  its  circle  (Fig.  15). 
This  acceleration  at  V4,  for  example,  is  along  the 
tangent  V4T4  to  the  circle,  or  at  right-angles  to  I V4  the 
direction  of  the  velocity  of  P  (Fig.  14)  ;  it  has  thus,  as 
we  have  seen,  purely  a  shunting  and  no  spurting  effect. 
Now,  since  IV4  and  IV5  were  drawn  parallel  to 
the  directions  of  motion  L4P4,  L5P5  at  P4  and  P5 
respectively,  it  follows  that  the  angles  L4NL5  and 
V4IV5 — between  two  pairs  of  parallel  lines — must  be 
equal.  Hence  the  mean  spin  of  the  tangent  from 
P4  to  P5  must  be  the  ratio  of  the  angle  V4IV5  to  the 
time  /  in  which  P  passes  from  P4  to  P5,  or,  what  is 


THE   GEOMETRY   OF   MOTION.  2/5 

the  same  thing,  in  which  V  passes  from  V4  to  Vs. 
But  the  magnitude  of  the  angle  V4IVS  is  (see  the 
footnote,  p.  271)  the  ratio  of  the  arc  V4VS  to  the 
radius  IV4.  Further,  the  ratio  of  the  arc  V4V5  to 
the  time  t  is  the  mean  speed  of  V  from  V4  to  V5 
(p.  260).  Thus  it  follows  that  the  mean  spin  of  the 
tangent  (Fig.  14)  is  the  ratio  of  the  mean  speed  of  V  to 
the  radius  IV4.  Taking  P5  closer  and  closer  to  P4,  and 
therefore  V5  to  V4,  mean  values  become  the  actual 
values  at  P4  and  V4 ;  we  therefore  conclude  that  the 
actual  spin  of  the  tangent  at  P4  is  the  ratio  of  the 
actual  speed  of  V  at  V4  to  IV4,  or,  in  other  words, 
to  the  speed  of  P.  Thus  the  spin  of  the  tangent  is 
the  ratio  of  the  speed  of  V  to  the  speed  of  P.  But 
the  speed  of  V  is  the  magnitude  of  the  acceleration, 
which  in  this  case  is  all  shunt.  Hence  we  conclude  that 
the  rate  of  shunting  at  P  is  properly  measured  by  the 
product  of  the  spin  of  the  tangent  and  the  speed  of  P 
(or  in  symbols,  shunt  acceleration's  X  U,  U  being  the 
speed  of  P).  But  we  have  seen  above  that  the  curva- 
ture is  the  ratio  of  the  spin  of  the  tangent  to  the  speed 
of  P  (or  in  symbols  curvature=S/U).  Combining, 
accordingly,  these  two  results  we  see  that  the  shunt 
acceleration  in  this  case  is  properly  measured  by  the 
product  of  curvature  and  the  square  of  the  speed.1 
This  acceleration  takes  place  in  the  direction  V4T4,  or 
is  perpendicular  to  the  direction  of  motion  at  P. 

A  little  consideration  will  show  the  reader  that  the 
expression  we  have  deduced  for  the  acceleration  per- 

1  If  r  be  the  radius  of  curvature  (see  the  footnote,  p.  273),  then  i/r  will 
be  the  curvature,  and  if  we  term  this  element  of  acceleration  normal 
acceleration,  we  have,  by  the  above  results,  the  three  equivalent  values  : 

U2 
normal  acceleration  =    -  =S  X  U  =/•  S3. 


2/6  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

pendicular  to  the  motion  would  not  be  altered  were 
the  speed  to  vary  between  P4  and  P5.  For,  returning 
to  Fig.  13,  we  note  that  IV4  is  to  be  changed  to  IV5. 
This  can  be  conceived  as  accomplished  in  the  follow- 
ing two  stages  (p.  -267)  :  (i.)  rotate  IV4  round  I  without 
changing  its  length  into  the  position  IV5  ;  (ii.)  stretch 
IV4  in  its  new  position  into  IV5.  The  first  stage 
corresponds  to  the  type  of  motion  we  have  just  dealt 
with,  or  shunt  acceleration  without  spurt ;  the  second 
stage  to  the  case  of  spurt  acceleration  without  shunt. 
In  the  limit  when  IV5  is  indefinitely  close  to  IV4,  the 
first  stage  gives  us  the  element  of  acceleration  perpen- 
dicular to  the  direction  of  motion,  and  the  second 
stage  the  element  of  acceleration  in  the  direction  of 
motion.  By  the  above  reasoning  the  former  is  seen 
to  be  measured  by  the  product  of  the  square  of  the 
speed  and  the  curvature. 

§  1 6. — Fundamental  Propositions  in  the  Geometry  of  Motion. 

We  are  now  in  a  position,  after  restating  our  results, 
to  draw  one  or  two  important  conclusions. 

Acceleration  has  spurt  and  shunt  components. 

The  spurt  acceleration  takes  place  in  the  direction 
of  motion,  and  is  measured  by  the  rate  at  which  speed 
is  being  increased  (or,  it  may  be,  decreased). 

The  shunt  acceleration  takes  place  perpendicular  to 
the  direction  of  motion,  and  is  measured  by  the  pro- 
duct of  the  curvature  and  the  square  of  the  speed. 

These  two  kinds  of  acceleration  are  usually  spoken 
of  as  speed  acceleration  and  normal  acceleration. 

From  these  results  we  conclude  that  :— 

i.  If  a  point  be  not  accelerated  it  will  describe  a 
straight  line  with  uniform  speed.  For  there  will  be 
no  spurt,  and  therefore  the  speed  must  be  uniform, 


THE  GEOMETRY  OF   MOTION.  277 

and  there  will  be  no  shunt,  and  therefore  the  path 
must  have  zero  curvature,  but  the  only  path  without 
bending  is  a  straight  line.  Neither  uniform  speed 
nor  zero  curvature  alone  denote  an  absence  of  ac- 
celeration. 

2.  When  a  point  is  constrained  to  move  in  a  given 
path  the  normal  acceleration  may  be  determined  in 
each  position  from  the  speed  and  the  form  of  the  path, 
i.e.,  from  its  curvature  or  bending.     In  this  case  the 
problem  is  to  find  the  speed  from  the  speed  acceleration. 

3.  When  a  point  is  free  to  move  in  a  given  plane, 
then  its  motion  can  be  theoretically  determined,  if  we 
know  its  velocity  in  any  one  position,  and  its  accelera- 
tion for  all  positions.    For  from  the  normal  acceleration 
and  the  speed  we  can  calculate  the  initial  amount  of 
bending  of  the  path;    thus  the  initial  form  of  the 
path  is  known.     For  a  closely  adjacent  position  on 
this  initial  form,  we  can  determine  from   the   speed 
acceleration  the  change  in  speed  due  to  this  change 
of  position.     Hence  we  obtain  the  speed  in  the  new 
position.     From  the  speed  in  the  new  position  and 
the  normal  acceleration  in  this  position,  the  bending 
in  the  next  little  element  of  path  may  be  deduced- 
This  process  may  be  repeated  as  often  as  we  please, 
till   the   whole   path   of  the   motion  is  constructed. 
The  succession  of  positions  may  be  taken  so  close 
together  that  we  obtain  the  form  of  the  path  to  any 
degree  of  accuracy  required.     Knowing  the  path  and 
the  speed  at  each  point  of  it  we  are  able  to  construct 
a  time-chart  like  that  of  our  Fig.  10  (p.  255).     For  we 
know  from  the  speeds  the  slope  at  each  point  of  the 
Q-curve.     Hence  we  commence  by  drawing  a  little 
element,  say  PiQ2,  at  the  slope  given  by  the  initial 
speed  ;   this  element  by  aid  of  the  horizontal  Q2P2, 


278  THE   GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

through  its  terminal  Q2,  gives  a  new  position  at 
distance  P1P2  from  the  initial  position  ;  the  speed  in 
this  new  position  determines  the  slope  of  the  next 
little  element  Q2Qs  of  the  curve ;  Q3  by  aid  of  the 
horizontal  Q3P3  gives  a  third  position  with  a  third 
speed  a  id  so  a  slope  for  the  third  element,  and  this 
process  can  be  continued  till  we  have  constructed  the 
time-chart  by  a  succession  of  little  elements.  By 
taking  these  elements  sufficiently  small,  we  make  the 
resulting  polygonal  line  differ  as  little  from  the  true 
curve  of  the  time-chart  as  we  please.  Now  we  have 
seen  that  when  the  map  of  the  path  and  the  time- 
chart  are  known,  the  motion  has  been  fully  described. 
Thus  we  conclude  that :  Given  the  velocity  of  a  point 
in  any  position  and  the  acceleration  of  the  point  in 
all  positions,  the  motion  of  the  point  is  fully  deter- 
mined.'1 

This  proposition  is  the  basis  of  the  whole  of  our 
mechanical  description  of  the  universe.  Rightly 
interpreted,  it  contains  all  that  we  can  assert  of  the 
"  mechanical  determinism  "  of  nature  ;  wrongly  inter- 
preted, it  is  the  basis  of  that  crude  materialism  which 
pictures  the  universe  as  an  aggregate  of  objective 
material  bodies,  enforcing  for  all  eternity  certain 
motions  on  each  other,  and  a  perception  of  those 
motions  upon  us.  What  the  proposition  exactly  tells 
us  is  this :  that  a  motion  is  fully  determined,  that  is, 
can  be  described,  either  by  giving  the  path  and  the 

1  The  methods  by  which  we  have  shown  that  the  initial  velocity  and 
position,  together  with  the  acceleration  in  all  positions,  determine  the 
map  of  the  path  and  the  time-chart,  are  only  theoretical  methods  of 
construction.  The  practical  methods  of  constructing  these  curves 
involve  the  highest  refinement  of  mathematical  analysis.  Our  object 
here  is  only  to  show  that  the  motion  is  theoretically  determined  by  a 
knowledge  of  the  above  quantities. 


THE  GEOMETRY  OF   MOTION.  279 

time  to  each  position  of  the  path,  or  by  giving  the 
velocity  in  any  one  position  and  the  acceleration  in 
all  positions.  We  are  really  dealing  with  two  different 
modes  of  describing  motion,  either  of  which  can  be 
deduced  from  the  other,  but  neither  of  which  explains 
why  the  motion  takes  place,  or  can  be  said  to  "  deter- 
mine "  it  in  the  sense  of  the  materialists. 

§  17, — The  Relativity  of  Motion.     Its  Synthesis  from  Simple 
Components. 

There  still  remains  a  point  to  which  it  is  needful  to 
draw  the  reader's  attention.  The  whole  motion  of 
our  point  P  (Fig.  9,  p.  25 1)  has  been  considered  relative 
to  a  point  O.  We  started  with  a  position  relative  to  O, 
and  it  follows  that  the  velocity  and  acceleration  we 
have  been  discussing  describe  changes  of  motion 
relative  to  O  also.  Thus  absohite  velocity  and  absolute 
acceleration  are  seen  to  be  as  meaningless  as  absolute 
position.  If  the  points  O  and  P  were  both  to  have 
their  motions  accelerated  in  the  same  manner  the 
relative  path  would  not  be  changed — any  more  than 
the  map  (Fig.  9)  is  changed  by  our  moving  about,  in 
any  manner  we  please,  the  page  on  which  it  is  printed. 
But  the  fact  that  all  motion  is  relative  leads  us  at  once 
to  the  very  natural  question  :  How  are  we  to  pass  from 
the  motion  of  a  point  relative  to  one  pole  O  to  motion 
relative  to  a  second  pole  O'  ?  We  must  look  at  this 
point  somewhat  closely,  for  it  involves  some  important 
consequences. 

Let  us  suppose  the  motion  of  P  relative  to  O 
known,  and  the  motion  of  O'  relative  to  O  known, 
we  require  to  find  the  motion  of  P  relative  to  O'. 
Let  PI,  P2  (Fig.  1 8)  be  two  successive  positions  of  P 
relative  to  O,  and  O',,  O'a  the  corresponding  positions 


28O  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

of  O'.  Then  O'tPj  is  the  first  and  O'2P2  is  the 
second  step,  measuring  the  position  of  P  relative  to 
O'.  From  O'j  draw  O'TP'2  parallel  and  equal  to 
O'2P2,  then  O'xPx  and  O'rP'2  give  the  relative  motion  of 
P  with  regard  to  Oz,  and  the  relative  displacement  in 
the  given  interval  is  PXP'2.  Now  draw  O\O2  parallel 
and  equal  to  O'2O,  then  O^O,  and  O'2O,  or  O'xO2, 
give  the  relative  positions  of  O  with  regard  to  O. 
But  by  the  equality  of  opposite  sides  of  parallelo- 
grams OO2  equals  O'aO'i,  equals  P2P'2.  Hence 

A  P. 


P2P'2  is  equal  to  the  displacement  of  O  relative  to 
O'.  But  in  the  geometry  of  steps  (p.  252) : — 

PT>'  T>    T>       j     T>    T)f 

i  A  2—^1*  2  +  ^  2r  2, 

or  in  words :  the  displacement  of  P  relative  to  O'  is 
equal  to  the  displacement  of  P  relative  to  O  added 
geometrically  to  the  displacement  of  O  relative  to  O'. 
Now  this  result  is  true,  however  large  or  small  these 
displacements  may  be,  and  these  displacements 
divided  by  the  number  of  units  in  the  interval  of 
time  which  is  the  same  for  all  of  them,  represent  the 
mean  velocities  in  this  interval.  Hence  we  conclude 
that :  the  mean  velocity  of  P  relative  to  O'  is  equal 


THE  GEOMETRY  OF   MOTION.  28 1 

to  the  mean  velocity  of  P  relative  to  O  added  geo- 
metrically to  the  mean  velocity  of  O  relative  to  O'. 
If  we  take  the  interval  of  time,  and  consequently  the 
displacements  smaller  and  smaller,  mean  velocities 
become  in  the  limit  the  actual  velocities.  These 
actual  velocities  have  always  the  direction  of  the 
displacements  P^,  PjP2  and  OO2  which  ulti- 
mately from  chords  become  tangents  to  the  corre- 
sponding paths ;  further,  since  the  interval  of  time  is 
the  same  for  all  the  displacements,  the  magnitudes  or 
speeds  of  these  velocities  are  always  proportional  to 
the  sides  PXP'2,  PXP2,  and  P2P'2,  (or  OO2)  of  the 
triangle  P^'aPa.  Hence  the  mean  velocities  and 
ultimately  the  actual  velocities  always  form  the  three 
sides  of  a  triangle  which  has  its  sides  parallel  and 
proportional  to  the  sides  of  the  triangle  P^'aPa, 
and  this  however  small  the  latter  triangle  becomes. 
The  actual  velocity  of  P  relative  to  O'  thus  forms 
one  side  of  a  triangle  of  which  the  actual  velocities 
of  P  relative  to  O  and  of  O  relative  to  O'  form  the 
other  two  sides.  In  other  words,  the  actual  velocity 
of  P  relative  to  O'  is  obtained  from  the  actual  velocities 
of  P  relative  to  O,  and  of  O  relative  to  O'  by  adding 
them  geometrically,  or  by  the  parallelogram  law. 
Just  as  the  position  of  P  relative  to  O'  was  found  by 
applying  the  parallelogram  law  to  the  steps  O'O 
and  OP  (p.  253),  so  we  obtain  the  velocity  of  P 
relative  to  O'  by  applying  the  same  law  to  the 
velocities  of  P  relative  to  O,  and  of  O  relative  to  O'. 
A  very  similar  proof  shows  us  that  the  accelera- 
tion of  P  relative  to  O'  may  be  obtained  in  the 
same  way  from  the  accelerations  of  P  relative  to  O 
and  O  relative  to  Of.  We  thus  obtain  an  easy  rule 
—that  of  the  parallelogram  law — for  passing  from 


282  THE   GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

the  motion  of  P  relative  to  O  to  that  of  P  relative 
toO'. 

The  whole  of  this  discussion  may  be  looked  at  from 
a  somewhat  different  standpoint.  We  may  suppose 
the  plane  of  the  paper  in  which  the  motion  of  P  about 
O  takes  place  to  be  always  moved  as  a  whole  so  that 
the  point  O'  remains  stationary.  In  order  to  do  this 
we  must  always  be  shifting  the  paper  so  that  O'2  falls 
back  on  O'r,  and  O'2O'i  will  measure  the  fitting  shift 
of  the  paper.  This  carries  P2  clearly  forward  to  P'2 
and  O  to  O2.  Thus  the  motion  of  P  relative  to  O' 
may  be  looked  at  as  the  motion  of  P  due  to  two 
sources — a  movement  of  P  about  O,  and  a  movement 
of  the  plane  containing  P  and  O  ;  this  later  motion 
is  the  motion  of  O  about  O',  or  is  equal  and  opposite 
to  the  perfectly  arbitrary  motion  of  O'  about  O. 
Thus  we  conclude  that  if  a  point  P  has  two  inde- 
pendent velocities  (corresponding  to  the  limits  of  the 
displacements  PtP2  and  P2P'2)  then  the  actual 
velocity  of  P  will  be  found  by  adding  these  velocities 
geometrically.  This  statement  is  usually  termed  the 
parallelogram  of  velocities.  A  precisely  similar  state- 
ment holds  for  independent  accelerations  (p.  253), 
and  is  called  the  parallelogram  of  accelerations.  To 
these  important  results  we  shall  have  occasion  again 
to  refer.  We  conclude,  therefore,  with  the  general 
statement  that  the  independent  displacements,  the 
independent  velocities,  and  the  independent  accelera- 
tions of  a  moving  point  are  respectively  added  geo- 
metrically as  we  add  steps,  or  by  the  so-called 
parallelogram  law. 

The  value  of  this  rule  of  combination  lies  in  the 
power  it  gives  us  of  building  up  complex  cases  of 
motion  from  simple  cases.  If  we  find  as  a  result  of 


THE  GEOMETRY  OF   MOTION.  283 

experience  that  the  perceptual  antecedents1  of  one 
acceleration  may  be  superposed  on  the  perceptual 
antecedents  of  a  second  acceleration — without  these 
accelerations  altering  their  value  to  our  degree  of  re- 
finement in  measuring  them, — then  the  parallelogram 
of  accelerations  will  be  invaluable  as  a  mode  of 
synthesis^  or  of  constructing  the  complex  from  the 
simple.  The  law  of  gravitation  applied  to  the 
planetary  theory  is  a  striking  example  of  the  value  of 
such  a  synthesis. 

In  this  chapter  we  have  seen  how  the  relative 
position,  velocity,  and  acceleration  of  points  may  be 
defined,  described,  and  measured.  We  have  been 
gleaning  wholly  in  the  conceptual  field  of  geometrical 
ideals.  We  have  next  to  ask  how  these  conceptions 
may  be  applied  to  describe  our  perceptual  experi- 
ence of  change  in  the  world  of  phenomena.  How 
are  these  three  factors,  position,  velocity,  and  accelera- 
tion, related  to  each  other  in  that  ideal  dance  of  cor- 
puscles to  which  we  reduce  the  physical  universe, 
in  that  atomic  gallop  by  aid  of  which  we  describe 
and  resume  our  sense-impressions?  How  do  we 
conceive  the  relative  position  of  these  corpuscles  to 
change  ?  How  are  their  speeds  and  directions  of  motion 
varying?  Does  experience  show  us  that  relative 
position  produces  a  definite  speed,  or  a  definite  spurt 
and  shunt  ?  The  answer  to  these  questions  lies  in  the 
so-called  properties  of  matter  and  in  the  laws  of  motion 
which  will  be  the  topics  of  our  two  following  chapters. 

1  By  "perceptual  antecedents"  we  are  to  understand  cause  in  the 
scientific  sense,  but  the  word  has  not  been  used  in  the  above  paragraph, 
because  the  reader  might  have  supposed  the  cause  of  acceleration  to  be 
the  metaphysical  (and  imperceptible)  entity  force,  whereas  it  really  lies 
in  perceptible  relative  position  (p.  345). 


284  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 


SUMMARY. 

1.  All  the  notions  by  aid  of  which  we  describe  and  measure  change 
are  geometrical^  and  thus  are  not  real  perceptual  limits.     They  are 
forms  distinguishing  and   classifying   the   contents  of  our   perceptual 
experience  under  the  mixed  mode  of  motion.     The  principal  of  these 
forms  are  point-motion,  spin  of  a  rigid  body  and  strain.     Motion  is 
found  to  be  relative,  never  absolute ;  for  example,  it  is  meaningless  to 
speak  of  the  motion  of  a  point  without  reference  to  what  system  the 
motion  of  the  point  is  considered  with  regard  to. 

2.  An  analysis  of  point-motion  leads  us  to  the  conceptions  of  velocity 
and  acceleration,  the  first  as  a  proper  measure  of  the  manner  in  which 
position  is  instantaneous  changing,  the  second  as  a  proper  measure  of 
how  velocity  itself  is  changing.      It  is  found  that  a  motion  is  fully 
determined,  or  theoretically  a  complete  description  of  its  path  and 
position  at  each  instant  of  time  may  be  deduced,  when  the  velocity  in 
any  one  position  and  the  acceleration  for  all  positions  are  given. 

3.  The  parallelogram  law  as  the  general  rule  for  combining  motions 
is  the  foundation  of  the  synthesis  by  which  complex  motions  are  con- 
structed out  of  simple  motions. 


LITERATURE. 

CLERK-MAXWELL,  J. — Matter  and  Motion,  chaps,  i.  and  ii.  London, 
1876. 

CLIFFORD,  W.  K. — The  Common  Sense  of  the  Exact  Sciences,  chap, 
iv.  "Position,"  and  chap.  v.  "Motion",*  London,  1885.  Also 
for  a  more  advanced  treatment  the  same  writer's  Elements  of 
Dynamic,  part  i.,  book  i.  chaps,  i.  and  ii.  ;  bcok  ii.  chaps,  i.  and 
ii.  ;  book  iii.  chap.  i. ;  London,  1878. 

MACGREGOR,  J.  G.— An  Elementary  Treatise  on  Kinematics  and 
Dynamics,  part  i.,  "Kinematics,"  chaps,  i.-iii.,  v.  and  vii.  Lon- 
don, 1887. 


CHAPTER  VII. 
MATTER. 

§  i. — "All  things  move  " — but  only  in  Conception. 

AN  old  Greek  philosopher,  who  lived  perhaps  some 
five  hundred  years  B.C.,  chose  as  the  dictum  in  which 
he  summed  up  his  teaching  the  phrase  :  "  All  things 
floiu."  After  ages,  not  understanding  what  Heraclitus 
meant — it  is  doubtful  whether  he  understood  himself 
—dubbed  him  "  Heraclitus  the  Obscure."  But  to-day 
we  find  modern  science  almost  repeating  Heraclitus' 
dictum  when  it  says  :  "All  things  are  in  motion''  Like 
all  dicta  which  briefly  resume  wide  truths,  this  dictum 
of  modern  science  requires  expanding  and  explaining 
if  it  is  not  to  be  misinterpreted.  By  the  words  "  All 
things  are  in  motion  "  we  are  to  understand  that,  step 
by  step,  science  has  found  it  possible  to  describe  our 
experience  of  perceptual  changes  by  types  of  relative 
motion  :  this  motion  being  that  of  the  ideal  points, 
the  ideal  rigid  bodies  or  the  ideal  strainable  media 
which  stand  for  us  as  the  signs  or  symbols  of  the  real 
world  of  sense-impressions.  We  interpret,  describe, 
and  resume  the  sequences  of  this  real  world  of  sense- 
impressions  by  discussing  the  relative  positions, 
velocities,  accelerations,  rotations,  spins,  and  strains 
of  an  ideal  geometrical  world  which  stands  for  us  as 
a  conceptual  representation  of  the  perceptual  world. 
In  our  Chapter  V.  we  saw  that  space  and  time  did 


286  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

not  themselves  correspond  to  actual  perceptions, 
but  were  modes  under  which  we  perceived,  and  by 
which  we  discriminated,  groups  of  sense-impressions. 
So  motion  as  the  combination  of  space  with  time  is 
essentially  a  mode  of  perception,  and  not  in  itself  a 
perception  (p.  231).  The  more  clearly  this  is  realized 
the  better  able  the  reader  will  be  to  appreciate  that 
the  "  motion  of  bodies  "  is  not  a  reality  of  perception, 
but  is  the  conceptual  manner  in  which  we  represent  this 
mode  of  perception  and  by  aid  of  which  we  describe 
changes  in  groups  of  sense-impressions  ;  the  perceptual 
reality  is  the  complexity  and  variety  of  the  sense- 
impressions  which  crowd  into  the  telephonic  brain- 
exchange.  That  the  results  which  flow  from  the 
conceptual  world  of  geometrical  motions  agree  so 
closely  with  our  perceptual  experience  of  the  outside 
world  of  phenomena  (p.  77)  is  a  phase  of  that  ac- 
cordance between  the  perceptive  and  reasoning  facul- 
ties upon  which  we  have  laid  stress  in  an  earlier  part 
of  this  volume  (p.  124). 

Wherein  lies  the  advance  from  Heraclitus  to 
the  modern  scientist  ?  Why  was  the  dictum  of  one 
not  unjustly  termed  obscure,  while  the  other  claims — 
and  rightly  claims — to  find  in  the  development  of  his 
dictum  the  sole  basis  for  our  knowledge  of  the 
physical  universe  ?  The  difference  lies  in  this  :  Hera- 
clitus left  his  flow  undescribed  and  unmeasured,  while 
modern  science  devotes  its  best  energies  to  the 
accurate  investigation  and  analysis  of  each  and  every 
type  of  motion  which  can  possibly  be  used  as  a  means 
of  describing  and  resuming  any  sequence  of  sense- 
impressions.  The  whole  object  of  physical  science  is 
the  discovery  of  ideal  elementary  motions  which  will 
enable  us  to  describe  in  the  simplest  language  the 


MATTER.  287 

widest  ranges  of  phenomena  ;  it  lies  in  the  symboli- 
zation  of  the  physical  universe  by  aid  of  the 
geometrical  motions  of  a  group  of  geometrical  forms. 
To  do  this  is  to  construct  the  world  mechanically  T  ; 
but  this  mechanism,  be  it  noted,  is  a  product  of  concep- 
tion, and  does  not  lie  in  our  perceptions  themselves 
(p.  139).  Startling  as  it  may,  when  first  stated,  appear 
to  the  reader,  it  is  nevertheless  true  that  the  mind 
struggles  in  vain  to  clearly  realize  the  motion  of  any- 
thing which  is  neither  a  geometrical  point  nor  a  body 
bounded  by  continuous  surfaces;  the  mind  absolutely 
rebels  against  the  notion  of  anything  moving  but  these 
conceptual  creations,  which  are  limits,  unrealizable, 
as  we  have  seen,  in  the  field  of  perception.  If  the 
world  of  phenomena  be,  as  the  materialists  would 
have  us  to  believe,  a  world  of  moving  bodies  like 
the  conceptual  world  by  which  science  symbolizes  it, 
if  we  are  to  assert  the  perceptual  existence  of  atom 
and  ether,  then  in  both  cases  we  are  incapable  of  con- 
sidering the  ultimate  element  which  moves  as  any- 
thing but  a  perceptual  realization  of  geometrical 
ideals.  Yet  so  far  as  our  sensible  experience  goes 
these  geometrical  ideals  have  no  phenomenal 
existence  !  We  have  clearly,  then,  no  right  to  infer 
as  a  basis  of  perception  things  which  our  whole 
experience  up  to  the  present  shows  us  exist  solely  in 
the  field  of  conception.  It  is  absolutely  illogical  to 
fill  up  a  void  in  our  perceptual  experience  by  pro- 
jecting into  it  a  load  of  conceptions  utterly  unlike 
the  adjacent  perceptual  strata.  It  is  "  a  profound 
psychological  mistake,"  says  George  Henry  Lewes, 
"  to  assert  that  whenever  we  can  form  clear  ideas,  not 

1  This  word  is  here  used  in  the  scientific  sense  of  Kirchhoff,  and  not 
in  the  popular  sense  of  Mr.  Gladstone  :  see  pp.  137  and  139. 


288  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

in  themselves  contradictory,  these  ideas  must  of 
necessity  represent  truths  of  nature." *  The  reader 
will,  we  feel  certain,  find  it  impossible  to  conceive 
anything  other  than  geometrical  ideals  as  the 
moving  element  at  the  basis  of  phenomena.  The 
attempt,  however,  to  conceive  something  else  is  worth 
the  making  for  it  inevitably  leads  us  to  the  con- 
clusion that  the  term  "  moving  body  "  is  not  scientific 
when  applied  to  perceptual  experience.  In  external 
perception  (p.  219)  we  have  sense-impressions  and 
more  or  less  permanent  groups  of  sense-impressions. 
These  sense-impressions  vary,  dissolve,  form  new 
groups — that  is,  they  change.  Of  these  messages  re- 
ceived at  the  brain  telephonic  exchange,  or  of  groups 
of  them,  we  cannot  say  they  move — they  appear, 
disappear,  and  reappear.  Change  is  the  right  word 
to  apply  to  them  rather  than  motion.  It  is  in  the 
field  of  conception  solely  that  we  can  properly  talk  of 
the  motion  of  bodies  ;  it  is  there,  and  there  only,  that 
geometrical  forms  change  their  position  in  absolute 
time — that  is,  move.  In  the  field  of  perception  motion 
is  but  a  popular  expression  to  describe  the  mixed 
mode  in  which  we  discriminate  and  distinguish  groups 
of  sense-impressions. 

§  2.—  The  Three  Problems. 

That  we  speak  of  the  motion  of  bodies  as  a  fact 
of  perceptual  experience  is  largely  due  to  the  con- 
structive elements  associated  with  immediate  sense- 
impression  2  (p.  49).  These  constructive  elements  are 

*  See  especially  §§  69,  6Qa,  and  108  of  his  Aristotle:  a  Chapter 
from  the  History  of  Science.  London,  1864. 

2  The  writer  is  not  objecting  to  the  current  use  of  such  expressions  as 
"  the  sun  moves,"  or  "the  train  moves."  Both  do  move — in  concep- 


MATTER.  289 

drawn  from  our  conceptual  notions  of  change,  which 
again  flow  very  naturally  from  a  limited  perception  ; 
a  deeper  perceptual  experience  is  required  to 
demonstrate  their  purely  ideal  character  (p.  203).  But 
the  reader  will,  perhaps,  hardly  be  prepared  to  accept 
the  conclusion  that  change  is  perceptual,  motion  con- 
ceptual, without  closer  analysis.  This  analysis  may 
be  summed  up  in  the  three  questions  :  What  is  it  that 
moves  ?  WJiy  does  it  move  ?  How  does  it  move  ? 

In  the  first  place  we  must  settle  whether  we  are 
asking  these  questions  of  the  conceptual  or  percep- 
tual spheres.  If  it  be  of  the  former,  the  world  of 
symbolic  motions  by  aid  of  which  science  describes 
the  sequences  of  our  sense-impressions,  then  these 
questions  are  easy  to  answer.  The  things  which 
move  are  points,  rigid  bodies  and  strainable  media, 
geometrical  concepts  one  and  all.  To  ask  why  they 
move  is  to  ask  why  we  form  conceptions  at  all,  and 
ultimately  to  question  why  science  exists.  Finally, 
the  manner  in  which  they  move  is  that  which  enables 
us  most  effectually  to  describe  the  results  of  our  per- 
ceptual experience. 

If  we  turn  to  the  perceptual  sphere  and  ask  what 
it  is  that  moves  and  why  it  moves,  we  are  compelled 
to  confess  ourselves  utterly  incapable  of  finding  any 
answers  whatever.  Ignorabimus^  we  shall  always  be 
ignorant,  say  some  scientists.  That  we  are  really 
ignorant  will  be  the  theme  of  the  present  chapter,  but 
I  believe  that  this  ignorance  does  not  arise  from  the 
limitation  of  our  perceptive  or  reasoning  faculties.  It 
is  rather  due  to  our  having  asked  unanswerable 

tion  ;  in  perception  there  is  a  change  of  sense-impressions.  So  soon  as 
space  is  recognized  as  a  mode  of  perception,  and  not  itself  a  phenomenon, 
this  conclusion  cannot  be  avoided. 

20 


290  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

questions.  We  may  legitimately  ask  why  the  com- 
plex of  our  sense-impressions  changes,  but,  according 
to  the  views  expressed  above,  motion  is  not  a  reality 
of  perception,  and  it  is  therefore,  for  the  sphere  of  per- 
ception, idle  to  ask  what  moves  and  why  it  moves. 
With  the  growth  of  more  accurate  insight  into  the 
conceptual  nature  of  motion  these  questions  will,  I 
believe,  be  dismissed  like  the  older  questions  as  to  the 
blue  milk  of  the  witches  and  the  influence  of  the  stars 
(p.  27).  With  their  dismissal,  however,  physical  science 
will  be  for  ever  relieved  of  the  metaphysical  difficulties 
as  to  matter  and  force  which  it  has  inherited  from 
scholastic  traditions.  Ignorabimus,  therefore,  does  not 
seem  the  true  answer  to  the  first  two  questions  ;  it 
may  be  a  true  answer  to  the  problem  of  changes  in 
sense-impression  (see  our  pp.  129  and  288).  The  third 
question — How  do  things  move  ? — also  wants  re- 
stating to  be  of  any  real  value,  and  when  restated  it 
merges  in  the  same  question  asked  of  the  conceptual 
sphere.  What,  we  must  ask,  are  the  conceptual  types 
of  motion  best  suited  to  describe  the  stages  of  our 
perceptual  experience  ?  The  answer  to  this  question 
forms  the  subject-matter  of  our  next  chapter. 

Some  of  my  readers  may  feel  inclined  to  consider 
that  in  this  discussion  we  are  entirely  deserting  the 
plane  of  common  sense.  What  moves  ?  Why,  natural 
bodies  move,  they  will  say,  is  the  common-sense 
answer.  But  common-sense  is  often  a  name  for  in- 
tellectual apathy.  Being  inquisitive,  we  naturally  ask 
what  these  bodies  consist  in,  and  probably  shall  be  told 
that  they  are  quantities  of  matter.  Still  persisting 
with  our  questions  we  ask  :  What,  then,  is  matter  ?  It 
will  not  do  to  put  us  off  with  the  reply  that  matter  is 
that  which  moves.  All  we  should,  then,  have  done 


MATTER*  291 

would  be  to  give  a  name  to  the  moving  thing,  but  in 
doing  so  we  should  not  have  succeeded  in  defining  or 
describing  it.  The  reader  may,  perhaps,  imagine  that 
insight  into  the  nature  of  matter  will  be  gained  by 
consulting  the  accepted  text-books  of  science.  Let  us 
accordingly  examine  the  statements  of  one  or  two. 

§  3. — How  the  Physicists  define  Matter. 

A  first  writer  says  :  "Matter  is  a  primary  conception 
of  the  human  mind"  and  more  than  one  elementary 
text-book  provides  us  with  practically  the  same 
definition.  Now,  the  obscurity  and  paralogism  of  this 
statement  could  only  be  equalled  by  the  perversities 
of  metaphysics.1  Matter,  we  are  told,  is  what  moves 
in  the  phenomenal  world,  and  if  it  were  asserted  that 
matter  is  a  primary  perception  of  the  human  mind  we 
might  be  no  wiser,  but  at  any  rate  the  statement 
would  not  be  without  sense.  But  perhaps  the  phrase 
is  not  to  be  taken  literally  as  signifying  that  a  primary 
conception  actually  moves  among  perceptions,  but 
only  that  we  can  form  intuitively  a  conception  of 
what  moves  perceptually  —  that  the  perceptual 
actually  corresponds  to  the  conceptual.  In  this  case 

1  "  Matter,"  says  Hegel,  "  is  the  mere  abstract  or  indeterminate 
reflection-intosomething-else,  or  reflection-into-self  at  the  same  time  as 
determinate;  it  is  consequently  Thinghood  which  then  and  there  is, — the 
subsistence  or  substratum  of  the  thing.  By  this  means  the  thing  finds 
in  the  matters  its  reflection-into-self ;  it  subsists  not  in  its  own  self,  but 
in  the  matters,  and  is  only  a  superficial  association  between  them,  or  an 
external  bond  over  them"  (The  Logic  of  Hegel,  translated  by  W. 
Wallace,  Oxford,  1874,  p.  202).  We  may  smile  over  such  absurdities, 
but  that  they  should  be  taught  in  the  last  decade  of  the  nineteenth 
century  in  our  universities,  and  this  to  immature  minds,  and  largely  at 
the  public  expense,  is  a  cause  for  sorrow  rather  than  amusement.  The 
much-abused  schoolmen  never  rivalled  these  Hegelian  quagmires  even 
before  they  were  transferred  to  English  soil. 


292  THE   GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

we  are  again  thrown  back  on  the  fact  that  conceptual 
motion  is  a  motion  of  geometrical  ideals,  and  that 
these  correspond  in  no  accurate  sense  to  our  percep- 
tions. Indeed,  if  matter  be  a  conception  at  all,  like 
the  conception  of  a  circle  it  ought  to  be  a  clear  and 
definite  idea,  whereas  the  reader  who  will  honestly 
ask  himself  what  he  conceives  by  matter  will  find  that 
an  answer  is  impossible,  or  that  in  attempting  one  he 
is  sinking  deeper  and  deeper  into  the  metaphysical 
quagmire. 

Proceeding  further,  we  naturally  turn  to  the  little 
work  termed  Matter  and  Motion,  by  Clerk-Maxwell, 
one  of  the  greatest  British  physicists  of  our  genera- 
tion. This  is  what  he  writes  of  matter  : — 

"  We  are  acquainted  with  matter  only  as  that  which 
may  have  energy  communicated  to  it  from  other  matter, 
and  which  may  in  its  turn  communicate  energy  to  other 
matter:' 

Now  this  appears  something  definite ;  the  only 
way  in  which  we  can  understand  matter  is  through 
the  energy  which  it  transfers.  What,  then,  is  energy  ? 
Here  is  Clerk-Maxwell's  answer  :— 

"Energy,  on  the  other  hand,  we  know  only  as  that 
which  in  all  natural  phenomena  is  continually  passing 
from  one  portion  of  matter  to  another" 

All  our  hopes  are  shattered  !  The  only  way  to 
understand  energy  is  through  matter.  Matter  has 
been  defined  in  terms  of  energy,  and  energy  again  in 
terms  of  matter.  Now  Clerk-Maxwell's  statements 
are  extremely  valuable  as  expressing  concisely  the 
nature  of  certain  conceptual  processes,  by  aid  of  which 
we  describe  certain  phases  of  our  perceptual  experience, 
but  as  defining  matter  they  carry  us  no  further  than 
the  statement  that  matter  is  that  which  moves. 


MATTER.  293 

We  will  now  turn  to  the  famous  Treatise  on  Natural 
Philosophy  of  Sir  William  Thomson  and  Professor  Tait 
—the  standard  work  in  the  English  language  on  its 
own  branches  of  physical  science.  These  writers,  in 
§  207,  tell  us  : — 

"  We  cannot,  of  course,  give  a  definition  of  matter 
which  will  satisfy  the  metaphysician,  but  the  naturalist 
may  be  content  to  know  matter  as  that  which  can  be 
perceived  by  the  senses,  or  as  that  which  can  be  acted 
upon  by,  or  can  exert,  force.  The  latter,  and  indeed 
the  former  also,  of  these  definitions  involves  the  idea 
of  force,  which,  in  point  of  fact,  is  a  direct  object  of 
sense ;  probably  of  all  our  senses,  and  certainly  of 
the  '  muscular  sense.'  To  our  chapter  on  *  Properties 
of  Matter '  we  must  refer  for  further  discussion  of  the 
question,  What  is  matter  ?  " 

That  the  naturalist  nowadays  is  not  bound  to 
satisfy  the  metaphysician — any  more  than  he  is 
bound  to  satisfy  the  theologian — will  be  admitted 
at  once  by  the  sympathetic  reader  of  our  own  volume. 
But  the  naturalist  is  bound  in  the  spirit  of  science  to 
probe  and  question  every  statement,  however  high 
the  authority  on  which  it  is  made ;  and  he  is  further 
bound  to  inquire  whether  a  statement  as  to  a  physical 
fact  is  also  in  accord  with  his  psychological  ex- 
perience. Science  cannot  be  separated  into  com- 
partments which  have  no  mutual  relationship,  no 
mutual  dependence,  and  no  intercommunication. 
Science  and  its  method  form  a  whole,  and  if  a 
physical  definition  be  not  psychologically  true,  it  is 
not  physically  true.  Now  we  have  seen  that  the 
contents  of  perception  are  sense-impressions  and 
stored  sense-impresses,  and  that  which  can  be  per- 
ceived by  the  senses  are  these  and  these  only.  Do 


294  THE   GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

our  authors  mean  to  define  all  sense-impressions  as 
matter  ?  Would  they  call  colour,  hardness,  pain, 
matter  ?  We  think  this  is  hardly  likely  ;  they  would 
probably  tell  us  that  the  source  of  certain  groups  of 
sense-impressions  is  what  they  term  matter;  but  this 
is  not  what  they  say.  Had  they  said  it  they  must 
themselves  have  recognized  that  they  were  passing 
beyond  the  veil  of  sense-impression  and  postulating 
a  "thing-in-itself"  (p.  87)  behind  the  world  of 
phenomena.  They  would  then  have  seen  that  they 
were  unconsciously  endeavouring  to  satisfy  the  meta- 
physician, whom  they  had  so  properly  disowned. 
This  unconscious  attempt  to  satisfy  the  "  meta- 
physician within  themselves "  is  further  evidenced 
by  their  second  statement,  which  throws  back  matter 
upon  force.  But  force  for  these  authors  is  the  cause 
of  motion  (§  217),  not  in  the  import  of  an  ante- 
cedent or  accompanying  sense-impression — as,  for 
example,  relative  position — but  in  the  metaphysical 
sense  of  a  moving  agent.  They  do  not,  indeed,  place 
this  moving  agent  behind  sense-impression  ;  they  even 
describe  it  as  a  "  direct  object  of  sense/'  but  from  the 
psychological  standpoint  force  must  either  be  a  sense- 
impression  or  a  group  of  sense-impressions,  for  as 
source  or  object  of  sense-impressions  it  would  be 
purely  metaphysical.  But  as  a  group  of  sense- 
impressions  in  us,  force  cannot  be  that  which  causes 
motion  in  an  objective  world.  As  to  our  muscular 
appreciation  of  force,  that  is  a  point  to  which  we 
shall  find  occasion  to  return  later.  We  ought  not, 
however,  to  lay  much  stress  on  these  authors'  remarks 
as  to  matter,  for  they  expressly  tell  us  that  what 
matter  is  will  be  further  discussed  in  another  chapter 
of  their  work.  Unfortunately,  this  portion  of  their 


MATTER.  295 

great  treatise  has  never  been  published,  although 
they  wrote  the  above  remarks  more  than  twenty 
years  ago.  Perhaps,  had  they  returned  to  the  subject, 
they  would  have  recognized  that,  if  the  word  matter 
had  not  appeared  more  frequently  in  their  text  than 
it  does  in  their  index,  their  volumes  would  have  lost 
not  an  iota  of  their  inestimable  value  to  the  physicist. 

One  of  the  two  authors  of  the  Treatise  on  Natural 
Philosophy  has,  however,  published  a  separate  work, 
entitled,  The  Properties  of  Matter.  On  pp.  12-13  of 
this  work  we  have  no  less  than  nine,  and  on  pp. 
287-91  we  have  no  less  than  twenty-five  definitions 
or  descriptions  of  matter,  yet  so  far  from  matter  being 
rendered  intelligible  by  all  these  statements  with 
regard  to  it,  Professor  Tait  himself  writes  : — 

"  We  do  not  knozv,  and  are  probably  incapable  of  dis- 
covering, what  matter  is"  And  again  :  "  The  discovery 
of  the  ultimate  nature  of  matter  is  probably  beyond  the 
range  of  human  intelligence? 

Now  these  statements  mark  a  considerable  ad- 
vance on  the  standpoint  of  the  Treatise  on  Natural 
Philosophy.  They  will  at  least  suggest  to  the  reader 
that  it  is  no  mere  whim  on  my  part  to  question  the 
right  of  matter  to  appear  at  all  in  scientific  treatises. 
When  one  author  tells  us  it  is  a  primary  conception 
of  the  human  mind,  and  another  that  it  is  probably 
beyond  the  range  of  human  intelligence,  we  feel  an 
uncomfortable  sense  of  the  metaphysician  smiling 
somewhere  round  the  corner.  If  our  leading  scientists 
either  fail  to  tell  us  what  matter  is,  or  even  go  as  far 
as  to  assert  that  we  are  probably  incapable  of  know- 
ing, it  is  surely  time  to  question  whether  this  fetish 
of  the  metaphysicians  need  be  preserved  in  the  temple 
of  science. 


296  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

§  4. — Does  Matter  occupy  Space  ? 

But  to  return  to  Professor  Tait ;  he  has  called  his 
book  The  Properties  of  Matter,  and  this  the  reader 
will  say  means  something,  and  something  very 
definite.  Now,  for  the  purposes  of  classifying  our 
sense-impressions,  it  is  undoubtedly  useful  to  term 
particular  groups  of  them  which  have  certain  dis- 
tinguishing characteristics  "  material  sense-impres- 
sions," and  these  material  sense-impressions  are  what 
Professor  Tait  deals  with  under  the  properties  of 
matter.  It  is  Professor  Tait,  the  unconscious  meta- 
physician, who  groups  this  class  of  sense-impressions 
together  and  supposes  them  to  flow  as  properties 
from  something  beyond  the  sphere  of  perception, 
namely,  matter.1  As  a  working  definition  of  matter, 
Professor  Tait  considers  that  we  may  say :  "Matter  is 
whatever  can  occupy  space?  Now  this  definition  will 
lead  us  to  a  number  of  ideas  which  it  is  instructive  to 
follow  up.  In  the  first  place,  is  it  perceptual  or  con- 
ceptual space  to  which  the  definition  applies  ?  If  the 
latter,  then  matter  must  be  a  geometrical  form — a 
result  which  we  think  our  author  does  not  intend. 
We  think  it  more  probable  that  Professor  Tait  looks 
upon  space  as  itself  objective,  although  he  avoids  any 
definite  statement  on  this  really  important  issue 
(p.  47).  From  the  standpoint  of  our  present  volume, 
however,  space  is  the  mode  by  which  we  distinguish 

1  The  unconscious  metaphysics  of  Professor  Tait  occur  on  nearly 
every  page  of  his  treatment  of  the  fundamental  concepts  of  physical 
science.  Thus  he  asserts  the  "objectivity  of  matter,"  while  force  is 
not  objective,  we  are  told,  but  subjective.  Notwithstanding  this 
assertion,  "matter  is,  as  it  were,  the  plaything  of  force."  How  this 
nothing,  this  "mere  phantom  suggestion  of  our  muscular  sense,"  this 
force,  can  have  an  objective  plaything  it  would  puzzle  a  metaphysician 
to  explain. 


MATTER.  297 

coexisting  groups  of  sense-impressions,  and  therefore 
only  groups  of  sense-impressions  can  be  said  to 
"  occupy "  space.  This  definition  would  therefore 
lead  us  to  identify  matter  with  groups  of  sense- 
impressions,  and  in  practical  everyday  life  the  things 
which  we  term  matter  are  certainly  more  or  less 
permanent  groups  of  sense-impressions,  not  unknow- 
able "things-in-themselves"  beyond  sense-impression. 
Now  there  can  be  no  scientific  objection  to  our  classi- 
fying certain  more  or  less  permanent  groups  of  sense- 
impressions  together  and  terming  them  matter, — to 
do  so  indeed  leads  us  very  near  to  John  Stuart  Mill's 
definition  of  matter  as  a  "permanent  possibility  of 
sensation  "  T — but  this  definition  of  matter  then  leads 
us  entirely  away  from  matter  as  the  thing  which 
moves.  It  can  hardly  be  said  that  weight,  hardness, 
impenetrability  move  ;  these  are  sense-impressions  in 
the  brain  telephonic  exchange  ;  their  grouping,  their 
variation  and  succession  may  lead  us  to  the  conception 
of  motion,  but  a  sense-impression  in  itself  cannot  be 
said  to  move ;  it  is  there  at  the  brain  terminal  or  not 
there.  In  order  to  bring  motion  into  the  sphere  of 
sense-impression,  we  are  compelled  to  associate  colour, 
hardness,  weight,  &c.,  with  geometrical  forms,  and  in 
making  such  constructs  (p.  49)  we  pass  from  the 
plane  of  perception  to  that  of  conception.  I  move 
my  hand  ;  my  power  to  realize  this  motion  depends 
on  my  conceiving  my  hand  bounded  by  a  continuous 
surface.  If  the  physicist  tells  me  that  my  hand  is  an 

1  System  of  Logic,  bk.  i.  chap.  iii.  That  groups  of  sense-impressions 
recur  in  a  more  or  less  permanent  state  is  an  experience  we  have  every 
moment  of  our  lives.  There  is  a  "  permanent  possibility  of  sense- 
impressions."  We  are  not  forced  to  assert  anything  about  this  possi- 
bility residing  in  a  supersensuous  entity  matter. 


298  THE   GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

aggregation  of  discrete  molecules,  then  my  idea  of 
the  motion  of  the  hand  is  thrown  back  on  the  motion 
of  the  swarm  of  molecules.  But  the  same  difficulty 
arises  about  the  individual  molecule.  I  may  surmount 
it  by  supposing  the  molecule  to  be  in  itself  a  corpora- 
tion of  atoms,  but  I  cannot  conceive  the  atom's  motion 
unless  it  be  bounded  by  a  continuous  surface  or  else  be 
a  point  The  only  other  way  out  of  the  difficulty  is  to 
construct  the  atom  of  still  smaller  atoms — (and  there 
are  certain  phenomena  presented  by  the  spectrum 
analysis  of  the  gaseous  elements  that  might  well 
induce  us  to  believe  that  the  atom  cannot  be  con- 
ceived as  the  ultimate  or  "  prime  element  of 
matter  ") — but  what  about  these  smaller  atoms,  are 
they  geometrical  ideals  or  are  they  built  up  of  tinier 
atoms  still,  and  if  so  where  are  we  to  stop  ?  The 
process  reminds  us  of  the  lines  of  Swift : — 

"  So  naturalists  observe,  a  flea 
Has  smaller  fleas  that  on  him  prey  ; 
And  these  have  smaller  still  to  bite  'em, 
And  so  proceed  ad  injinitum." 

I  am  unable  to  verify  Swift's  statement  as  to  the  fleas, 
but  I  feel  quite  sure  that  to  assert  the  real  existence 
in  the  world  of  phenomena  of  all  the  concepts  by  aid 
of  which  we  scientifically  describe  phenomena — 
molecule,  atom,  prime-atom — even  if  it  be  ad  infinitum, 
will  not  save  us  from  having  ultimately  to  consider 
the  moving  thing  to  be  a  geometrical  ideal,  from 
having  to  postulate  the  phenomenal  existence  of  what 
is  contrary  to  our  perceptual  experience.  This  point 
brings  out  very  clearly  what  the  present  writer  holds 
to  be  a  fundamental  canon  of  scientific  method, 
namely  :  To  no  concept^  however  invaluable  it  may  be 


MATTER.  299 

as  a  means  of  describing  the  routine  of  perceptions  >  ought 
phenomenal  existence  to  be  ascribed  until  its  perceptual 
equivalent  has  been  actually  disclosed. 

Whenever  we  disregard  this  canon,  when,  for  ex- 
ample, we  assert  reality  for  the  mechanisms  by  aid  of 
which  we  describe  our  physical  experience,  then  we 
are  more  likely  than  not  to  conclude  with  an  antinomy, 
or  a  conflict  of  rules.  For  such  mechanisms  are  con- 
structs largely  based  on  conceptual  limits,  which  are 
unattainable  in  the  field  of  perception.  When  we 
consider  space  as  objective  and  matter  as  that  which 
occupies  it,  we  are  forming  a  construct  largely  based 
on  the  geometrical  symbols  by  aid  of  which  we  analyze 
motion  conceptually.  We  are  projecting  the  form 
and  volume  of  conception  into  perception,  and  so 
accustomed  have  we  got  to  this  conceptual  element 
in  the  construct  that  we  confuse  it  with  a  reality  of 
perception  itself.  When  we  go  a  stage  further  in  the 
phenomenalizing  of  conceptions,  and  postulate  the 
reality  of  atoms,  the  antinomy  becomes  clear.  If 
bodies  are  made  up  of  swarms  of  atoms,  how  can  they 
have  a  real  volume  or  form  ?  What  is  the  volume 
or  form  of  a  swarm  of  bees  or  a  cloud  of  dust? 
Obviously  we  can  only  give  them  shape  and  size  by 
enclosing  them  conceptually  in  an  ideal  geometrical 
surface.  Just  as  in  a  swarm  of  bees  or  a  cloud  of 
dust  odd  members  of  the  community  near  this  imagi- 
nary surface  are  continually  passing  in  and  out,  so — if 
we  phenomenalize  conception — we  must  assert  that  at 
the  surface  of  water  or  of  iron  odd  molecules  or  atoms 
are  perpetually  leaving  or,  it  may  be,  re-entering  the 
swarm.  Condensation  and  evaporation  go  on  at  the 
surface  of  the  water  and  iron  has  a  metallic  smell. 
Now  if  the  swarm  be  in  this  continual  state  of  flow 


3OO  THE  GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

at  the  surface  we  can  only  speak  of  it  as  having 
volume  or  form  ideally^  or  as  a  mode  of  conceptually 
distinguishing  one  group  of  sense-impressions  from 
another  (p.  197).  It  is  the  conceptual  volume  or  form 
which  occupies  space,  and  it  is  this  form,  and  not  the 
sense-impressions,  which  we  conceive  to  move.  If  we 
throw  back  the  occupancy  of  space  on  the  individual 
members  of  the  swarm,  it  is  certainly  not  the 
volumes  or  forms  of  the  individuals,  which  we  con- 
sider as  the  volume  or  form  of  the  material  body,  for 
the  former  we  treat  as  imperceptible  and  the  latter  as 
perceptible.  Further,  we  must  then  infer  that  the 
unknown  is  ultimately  unlike  the  known,  that  geo- 
metrical ideals  can  be  realized  in  the  imperceptible. 
This,  however,  is  a  distinct  breach  of  the  canon  of 
logical  inference  (p.  72). 

So  far,  then,  our  analysis  of  the  physicist's  defini- 
tions of  matter  irresistibly  forces  upon  us  the  following 
conclusions  :  That  matter  as  the  unknowable  cause 
of  sense-impression  is  a  metaphysical  entity x  as 
meaningless  for  science  as  any  other  postulating  of 
causation  in  the  beyond  of  sense-impression  ;  it  is  as 
idle  as  any  other  thing-in-itself,  as  any  other  projection 
into  the  supersensuous,  be  it  the  force  of  the  mate- 
rialists, or  the  infinite  mind  of  the  philosophers.  The 
classification  of  certain  groups  of  sense-impressions  as 
material  groups  is,  on  the  other  hand,  scientifically  of 
value ;  it  throws  no  light,  however,  on  matter  as 
that  which  perceptually  moves. 

Conceptually  all  motion  is  the  motion  of  geometrical 
ideals,  which  are  so  chosen  as  best  to  describe  those 

1  The  scientific  reader  must  for  the  present  have  at  least  sufficient 
confidence  in  the  author  not  to  believe  that  mass  is  thrown  overboard 
with  the  fetish  matter. 


MATTER.  301 

changes  of  sense-impression  which  in   ordinary  lan- 
guage we  term  perceptual  motion. 

§  5 . —  The  "  Common-sense"  View  of  Matter  as  Impenetrable  and 

Hard. 

Now  the  reader  may  feel  inclined,  on  the  basis  of 
his  daily  experience,  to  assert  that  both  the  physicists 
above  referred  to  and  the  author  are  really  quibbling 
about  words,  and   that  we  can    sufficiently  describe 
matter  by  saying  that  it  is  impenetrable  and   hard. 
Now  these  terms  describe  important  classes  of  sense- 
impressions,  and  the  sense-impressions  of  impenetra- 
bility and  hardness  are  very  frequently  factors  of  what 
we  have  called  material  groups  of  sense-impressions. 
But  it  is  very  doubtful  whether  we  can  consider  them 
as  invariably  associated  with  these  material  groups. 
At  any  rate  if  we  do  we  shall  find  ourselves  again 
involved  in  the  antinomies  which  result  when  we  pass 
incautiously  to  and  fro  from  the  field  of  perception  to 
that  of  conception.     When  we  say  a  thing  is  impene- 
trable, we  can  only  mean  that  something  else  will  not 
pass   through    it,  or   that   there   are   two   groups   of 
sense-impressions  which,  in  our  perceptual  experience, 
we  have  always  been  able  to  distinguish  under  the 
mode  space.     Impenetrability,  therefore,  can  only  be 
a   relative   term  ;    one   thing   is  .impenetrable   for   a 
second.     When  we  say  that  matter  is  impenetrable 
we   cannot    mean    that   nothing   whatever   can    pass 
through   it.     A  bird    cannot  fly  through  a  sheet  of 
plate  glass,  but  a  ray  of  light  does  penetrate  it  per- 
fectly easily.     A  ray  of  light  cannot  pass  through  a 
brick  wall,  but  a  wave  of  electric  oscillations  can.     In 
order  to  describe  the  motion  of  these  luminous  and 
electric  waves  the  physicist  conceives  ether  to  pene- 


302  THE   GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE 

trate  all  bodies  and  to  act  as  a  medium  for  the  transit 
of  energy  through  them.  Matter  cannot  therefore  be 
looked  upon  as  the  thing  which  is  absohitely  impene- 
trable. 

Or,  are  we  missing  the  point  of  what  is  meant,  when 
it  is  asserted  that  matter  is  that  which  is  impenetrable  ? 
Are  we  to  postulate  the  real  existence  of  atoms  and 
then  to  suppose  the  individual  members  of  the  swarm 
impenetrable  ?  Here  again  a  difficulty  arises.  There 
is  much  that  tends  to  convince  physicists  that  the 
atom  cannot  be  conceived  as  the  simplest  element  of 
the  conceptual  analysis  of  material  groups.  Just  as 
a  bell  when  struck  sets  the  air  in  motion  and  gives  a 
note,  so  we  conceive  an  atom  capable  of  being  struck, 
and  of  setting  not  the  air  but  the  ether  in  motion,  of 
giving,  as  we  might  express  it,  an  ether  note.  These 
notes  produce  in  us  certain  optical  sense-impressions — 
for  example,  the  bright  lines  of  the  spectrum  of  an 
attenuated  gas.  As  without  seeing  two  bells  we 
might,  and  indeed  often  do,  distinguish  them  by  their 
notes,1  so  the  physicist  distinguishes  an  atom  of 
hydrogen  from  an  atom  of  oxygen,  although  he  has 
never  seen  either,  by  the  different  light  notes  which 
he  conceives  to  arise  from  them.  But  as  the  bell  to 
give  a  note  must  be  considered  as  vibrating — changing 
its  shape  or  undergoing  strain— so  the  physicist  prac- 
tically finds  himself  compelled  to  conceive  the  atom 
as  undergoing  strain,  or  changing  its  shape.  This 
conception  forces  us  to  suppose  the  atom  built  up 
of  distinct  parts  capable  of  changing  their  relative 

1  The  householder  is  generally  able  to  distinguish  the  sound  of  the 
back-door  from  that  of  the  front-door  bell,  although,  probably,  in 
ninety-nine  cases  out  of  a  hundred  he  may  never  have  seen  the  bells  in 
his  house. 


MATTER.  303 

position.  What  are  these  ultimate  parts  of  the  atom, 
by  the  relative  motion  of  which  we  describe  our  sense- 
impressions  of  the  bright  lines  in  the  spectrum  ?  We 
have  as  yet  formed  no  conception.  Does  the  ether  or 
anything  else  penetrate  between  these  ultimate  parts  of 
the  atom  ?  We  cannot  say.  In  the  present  state  of 
our  knowledge  it  is  impossible  to  tell  whether  it  would 
or  would  not  simplify  things  to  conceive  the  atom  as 
penetrable  or  impenetrable.  Hence,  even  if  we  go 
so  far  as  to  give  the  concept  atom  a  phenomenal 
existence,  it  will  not  help  us  to  understand  what  is 
meant  by  the  assertion  that  matter  is  impenetrable. 

§  6. — Individuality  does  not  denote  Sameness  in  Substratum. 

Shall  we,  however,  be  more  dogmatic  still,  and, 
denying  that  ether  is  matter,  assert  that  matter  is 
impenetrable  relative  to  matter  ?  In  order  to  give 
any  definite  answer  to  this  question  we  have  again 
to  pass  from  the  perceptible  material  group  to  its 
supposed  elementary  basis,  the  atom,  and  to  ask 
whether  we  have  any  reason  for  conceiving  atoms  as 
incapable  of  penetrating  each  other.  In  the  first 
place  the  physicist,  although  he  has  never  caught  an 
atom,  yet  conceives  it  as  something  which  is  incapable 
of  disappearing — it  continues  to  be.  In  the  next  place, 
if  we  conceive  it  as  entering  into  combination  with  a 
second  atom,  although  we  have  no  reason  for  asserting 
that  the  two  atoms  do  not  mutually  penetrate,  we  are 
still  compelled,  in  order  to  describe  by  aid  of  atoms 
our  perceptual  experience,  to  conceive  that,  out  of  the 
combination,  two  separate  atoms  can  again  be  obtained 
with  the  same  individual  characteristics  as  the  original 
two  possessed.  What  right  have  we  to  postulate 
these  laws  with  regard  to  atoms  when  atoms  are,  even 


304  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

if  real,  still  absolutely  imperceptible  to  us,  when  we 
are  absolutely  unable  to  observe  their  mutual  action  ? 
We  have  exactly  the  same  logical  right  as  we  have  to 
lay  down  any  scientific  law  whatever.  Namely,  we 
find  that  these  laws  as  to  the  action  of  single  atoms, 
when  applied  to  large  groups  of  atoms,  enable  us  to 
describe  with  very  great  accuracy  what  occurs  in  those 
phenomenal  bodies,  which  we  scientifically  symbolize 
by  groups  of  atoms ;  they  enable  us  to  construct 
without  contradiction  by  perceptual  experience,  those 
routines  of  sense-impression  which  we  term  chemical 
reactions. 

The  hypotheses  that  the  individual  atom  is  both 
indestructible  and  impenetrable  suffice  to  elucidate 
certain  physical  and  chemical  properties  of  the  bodies 
we  construct  from  atoms.  But  the  continued  existence 
of  atoms  under  physical  changes  and  the  reproduction 
of  their  individuality  on  the  dissolution  of  chemical 
combination  might  possibly  be  deduced  from  other 
hypotheses  than  those  of  the  indestructibility  and 
impenetrability  of  the  individual  atom.  It  does  not 
follow  of  logical  necessity  that  because  we  experience 
the  same  group  of  sense-impressions  at  different  times 
and  in  different  places,  or  even  continuously,  that 
there  must  be  one  and  the  same  thing  at  the  basis  of 
these  sense-impressions.  An  example  will  clearly 
show  the  reader  what  we  mean  and  at  the  same  time 
demonstrate  that  however  useful  as  hypotheses  the 
indestructibility  and  impenetrability  of  the  atom  may 
be,  they  are  still  not  absolutely  necessary  conceptions  ; 
so  that  even  if  we  do  project  our  atom  into  an  imper- 
ceptible of  the  phenomenal  world,  it  will  not  follow 
that  there  must  be  an  unchangeable  individual  some- 
thing at  all  times  and  in  all  positions  as  the  basal 


MATTER. 


305 


element  of  a  permanent  group  of  sense-impressions. 
The  permanency  and  sameness  of  the  phenomenal 
body  may  lie  in  the  individual  grouping  of  the 
sense-impressions  and  not  in  the  sameness  of  an 
imperceptible  something  projected  from  conception 
into  phenomena. 

The  example  we  will  take  is  that  of  a  wave  on  the 


WAVE 


FIG.  19. 

surface  of  the  sea.  The  wave  forms  for  us  a  group 
of  sense-impressions,  and  we  look  upon  it,  and  speak 
of  it,  as  if  it  were  an  individual  thing.  But  we  are 
compelled  to  conceive  the  wave  when  it  is  fifty  yards 
off  as  consisting  of  quite  different  moving  things  to 
what  it  does  when  it  reaches  our  feet — the  substratum 
of  the  wave  has  changed.  Throw  a  cork  in  ;  it  rises 

21 


306  THE  GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

and  falls  as  the  wave  passes  it,  but  is  not  carried  along 
by  it.     The  wave  may  retain  its  form  and  be  for  us 
exactly   the    same    group    of    sense-impressions    in 
different  positions  and  at  different  times,  and  yet  its 
substratum  may  be  continually  changing.     We  might 
even  push  the  illustration  further  ;  we  might  send  two 
waves  of  different  individual  shapes  (Ffg.  19)  along  the 
surface  of  still  water  in  opposite  directions  (a),  or  in  the 
same  direction  if  the  pursuing  wave  had  the  greater 
speed.    One  of  these  waves  would  meet  or  overtake  the 
other  (&)  ;  they  would  coalesce  or  combine  (<:),  pro- 
ducing in  us  for  a  time  (which  depends  entirely  on  their 
relative  speeds),  a  new  group  of  sense-impressions  dif- 
fering totally  from  either  individual  group ;  but  they 
would  ultimately  pass  each  other  (d)  and  emerge  with 
their  distinct  individualities  the  same  as  of  old  (e). 
Throughout  the  whole  of  this  sequence  the  substrata  of 
the  two  individual  waves  are  changing  and  for  the  time 
of  the  combination  their  substratum  is  identical,  and 
yet  the   waves  are  able  to  preserve  their  individual 
characteristics,  so  far  as  reappearing  with  them  after 
combination  is  concerned.1     Thus  sameness  of  sense- 
impressions  before  and  after  a  combination  is  seen 
from  a  perceptual  example  not  to  involve  of  necessity 
a  sameness  of  substratum. 

Now  we  have  cited  this  example  of  the  wave 
for  two  reasons.  In  the  first  place  it  shows  us 
that  it  is  possible  to  conceive  atoms  as  penetrable 
by  atoms,  and  as  varying  from  moment  to  moment 

1  If  analogy  were  to  be  sought  to  the  sameness  of  total  weight  before, 
during,  and  after  combination,  it  might  be  found  in  the  sameness  of  the 
volume  of  fluid  raised  above  the  sea-level,  before,  during,  and  after 
coalition.  Thus  sameness  of  weight  does  not  in  conception  necessarily 
involve  sameness  of  substratum. 


MATTER.  307 

in  their  substratum,  without  at  the  same  time 
denying  the  possibility  of  their  physical  perma- 
nency and  individual  reproduction  after  chemical 
combination.  To  consider  an  atom  as  consisting 
always  of  the  same  substratum,  and  as  impenetrable 
by  other  atoms,  may  help  us  to  describe  easily  certain 
physical  and  chemical  phenomena  ;  but  it  is  quite 
conceivable  that  other  hypotheses  may  equally  well 
account  for  these  phenomena,  and  this  being  so  we 
have  clearly  no  right  first  to  project  special  conceptions 
into  the  world  of  real  phenomena,  and  then  to  assert 
on  the  strength  of  this  that  matter,  penetrable  in  itself, 
is  impenetrable  in  its  ultimate  element,  the  atom. 
Clearly  impenetrability  is  neither  in  perception  nor 
conception  a  necessary  factor  of  material  groups  of 
sense-impressions.  Further,  the  permanence  and 
sameness  of  such  a  group  do  not  necessarily  involve 
the  conception  of  a  permanent  and  same  substratum 
for  the  group. 

My  second  reason  for  citing  this  wave  example  lies 
in  the  light  it  throws  on  the  possibilities  involved  in 
the  statement :  "Matter  is  that  ivhich  moves"  The  wave 
consists  of  a  particular  form  of  motion  in  the  sub- 
stratum which  for  the  time  constitutes  the  wave.  This 
form  of  motion  itself  moves  along  the  surface  of  the 
water.  Hence  we  see  that  besides  the  substratum 
something  else  can  be  conceived  as  moving,  namely, 
forms  of  motion.  What  if,  after  all,  matter  as  the 
moving  thing  could  be  best  expressed  in  conception 
by  a  form  of  motion  moving,  and  this  whether  the 
substratum  remain  the  same  or  not  ?  To  this  sugges- 
tion we  shall  return  later,  as  it  is  one  extremely 
fruitful  in  its  results. 


308  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

§  7. — Hardness" not  Characteristic  of  Matter. 
It  remains  for  us  now  to  deal  with  the  other  cha- 
racteristic, hardness,  which  is  popularly  attributed  to 
matter.  There  are  certain  persons  who,  when  men's 
ignorance  as  to  the  nature  of  matter  is  suggested  to 
them,  are  content  to  remark  that  one  has  only  to  knock 
one's  head  against  a  stone  wall  in  order  to  have  a 
valid  demonstration  of  the  existence  and  the  nature  of 
matter.  Now  if  this  statement  be  of  any  value,  it  can 
only  mean  that  the  sense-impression  of  hardness  is  the 
essential  test  of  the  presence  of  matter  in  these  persons' 
opinion.  But  none  of  us  doubt  the  existence  of  the 
sense-impression  hardness  associated  with  other  sense- 
impressions  in  certain  permanent  groups  ;  we  have 
been  aware  of  it  from  childhood's  days,  and  do  not 
require  its  existence  to  be  experimentally  demon- 
strated now.  It  is  one  of  those  muscular  sense- 
impressions  which  we  shall  see  are  conceived  by 
science  to  be  describable  in  terms  of  the  relative 
acceleration  of  certain  parts  of  our  body  and  of 
external  bodies.  But  it  is  difficult  to  grasp  how  the 
sense-impression  of  hardness  can  tell  us  more  of  the 
nature  of  matter  than  the  sense-impression  of  soft- 
ness might  be  supposed  to  do.  There  are  clearly 
many  things  which  are  popularly  termed  matter  and 
are  certainly  not  hard.  Further,  there  are  things 
which  satisfy  the  definitions  of  matter  as  that  which 
moves  or  as  that  which  fills  space,  but  which  are  very 
far  indeed  from  producing  any  sense-impression  of  the 
nature  of  hardness  or  softness ;  nor  would  they  even 
satisfy  our  definition  if  we  said  that  matter  is  that 
which  is  heavy,  heaviness  being  certainly  a  more  widely- 
spread  factor  of  material  groups  of  sense-impressions 
than  hardness.  Between  the  sun  and  planets,  between 


MATTER.  309 

the  atoms  of  bodies,  physicists  conceive  the  ether  to 
exist,  a  medium  whose  vibrations  constitute  the 
channel  by  means  of  which  electro-magnetic  and 
optical  energy  is  transferred  from  one  body  to  another- 
In  the  first  place,  the  ether  is  a  pure  conception  by 
aid  of  which  we  correlate  in  conceptual  space  various 
motions.  These  motions  are  the  symbols  by  which 
we  briefly  describe  the  sequences  and  relationships  we 
perceive  between  various  groups  of  phenomena.  The 
ether  is  thus  a  mode  of  resuming  our  perceptual 
experience ;  but  like  a  good  many  other  conceptions  of 
which  we  have  no  direct  perception,  physicists  project 
it  into  the  phenomenal  world  and  assert  its  real 
existence.  There  seems  to  be  just  as  much,  or  little, 
logic  in  this  assertion  as  in  the  postulate  that  there  is 
a  real  substratum,  matter,  at  the  back  of  groups  of 
sense-impressions ;  both  at  present  are  metaphysical 
statements.  Now  there  is  no  evidence  forthcoming  that 
the  ether  must  be  conceived  as  either  hard  or  heavy,1 
and  yet  it  can  be  strained  or  its  parts  put  in  relative 
motion.  Further,  from  Professor  Tait's  standpoint,  it 
occupies  space.  Hence  those  who  associate  matter 
with  hardness  and  weight  must  be  prepared  to  deny 
that  the  ether  is  matter,  or  be  content  to  call  it  non- 
matter.  It  is  worth  noting,  at  the  same  time,  that  the 
metaphysicians — whether  they  be  materialists  asserting 
the  phenomenal  existence  both  of  space  and  of  a 
permanent  substratum  of  sense-impression,  or  "  com- 
mon-sense "  philosophers  asking  us  to  knock  our 

1  I  venture  to  think  Sir  William  Thomson's  attempt  to  weigh  ether  a 
retrograde  step  (see  his  Lectures  on  Molecular  Dynamics,  pp.  206-8, 
Baltimore,  1884).  If  the  ether  be  a  sufficiently  wide-embracing  con- 
ception, gravitation  should  flow  from  it,  and  this  certainly  was  Sir 
William's  view  when  he  propounded  the  vortex  atom. 


316  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

heads  against  stone  walls — reach  hopelessly  divergent 
results  when  they  say  that  matter  is  that  which  moves, 
that  matter  occupies  space,  and  that  matter  is  that 
which  is  heavy  and  hard. 

§  8. — Matter  as  non- Matter  in  Motion. 

There  is,  however,  a  still  greater  dilemma  in  store 
for  the  "  common-sense  "  philosophers.  We  have  not 
yet  reached  a  clear  conception  of  what  the  ether,  the 
non-matter  of  our  philosophers,  consists  in.  There 
are  in  fact  two,  at  first  sight,  completely  divergent 
ways  in  which  the  ether  is  reached  as  a  conceptual 
limit  to  our  perceptual  experience  (see  p.  217),  but  it  is 
the  great  hope  of  science  at  the  present  day  that  "hard 
and  heavy  matter  "  will  be  shown  to  be  ether  in  motion. 
In  other  words,  it  is  well  within  the  range  of  possibility 
that  during  the  next  quarter  of  a  century  science  will 
have  discovered  that  our  symbolic  description  of  the 
phenomenal  universe  will  be  immensely  simplified,  if 
we  take  as  our  symbolic  basis  for  material  groups  of 
sense-impressions  a  type  of  motion  of  the  conceptual 
ether ;  in  other,  more  expressive  if  less  accurate, 
language,  if  we  treat  our  friends'  matter  as  their  non- 
matter  in  motion.  We  shall  then  find  that  our  sense- 
impressions  of  hardness,  Weight,  colour,  temperature, 
cohesion,  and  chemical  constitution,  may  all  be 
described  by  aid  of  the  motions  of  a  single  medium, 
which  itself  is  conceived  to  have  no  hardness,  weight, 
colour,  temperature,  nor  indeed  elasticity  of  the 
ordinary  perceptual  type.  This  would  mean  an 
immeasurably  great  advance  in  our  scientific  power 
of  description.  Yet  if  physicists  even  then  persist  in 
projecting  the  conceptual  into  the  sphere  of  sense- 
impression,  and  in  asserting  a  phenomenal  existence 


MATTER.  311 

for  the  ether,  we  should  still  be  ignorant  of  what  it  is 
that  moves,  of  what  ether-matter  may  really  consist 
in. 

Our  analysis,  therefore,  of  the  various  statements 
made  by  physicists  and  common-sense  philosophers 
with  regard  to  the  nature  of  matter,  shows  us  that  they 
are  one  and  "^metaphysical- — that  is,  they  attempt  to  de- 
scribe something  beyond  sense-impression,beyond  per- 
ception, and  appear,  therefore,  at  best  as  dogmas,  at 
worst  as  inconsistencies.  If  we  confine  ourselves  to  the 
field  of  logical  inference,  we  see  in  the  phenomenal  uni- 
verse not  matter  in  motion,  but  sense-impressions  and 
changes  of  sense-impressions,  coexistence  and  sequence, 
correlation  and  routine.  This  world  of  sense-impression 
science  symbolizes  in  conception  by  an  infinitely  ex- 
tended medium,  whose  various  types  of  motion  corre- 
spond to  diverse  groups  of  sense-impressions,  and  enable 
us  to  describe  the  correlations  and  sequences  of  these 
groups.  The  moving  elements  of  this  medium  can  in 
thought  be  conceived  of  only  as  geometrical  ideals,  as 
points  or  continuous  surfaces.  To  make  our  symbolic 
chart  or  picture  agree  the  better  with  perceptual  experi- 
ence, we  find  it  necessary  to  endow  these  geometrical 
ideals  with  certain  relative  positions,  velocities,  and  ac- 
celerations, the  correlations  of  which  are  expressible 
in  certain  simple  laws  termed  the  laws  of  motion  (see 
the  following  Chapter).  If  we  choose  to  term  the 
moving  things  of  the  conceptual  chart  matter,  there 
can  be  no  objection  to  the  term,  provided  we  carefully 
distinguish  this  conceptual  matter  from  any  meta- 
physical ideas  of  matter  as  the  substratum  of  sense- 
impression,  as  that  which  perceptually  moves,  as  that 
which  fills  space,  or  as  that  which  can  be  defined  as 
heavy,  hard,  and  impenetrable.  Conceptual  matter  is 


312  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

thus  merely  a  name  for  the  geometrical  ideals  endowed 
with  certain  correlated  motions  by  aid  of  which  we 
describe  the  routine  of  our  external  perceptions.  It 
is  in  this  sense  that  we  shall  use  the  term  matter  for 
the  remainder  of  this  work,  unless  we  are  expressly 
referring  to  the  matter  of  the  metaphysicians. 
"  Heavy  "  matter  will  be  a  name  for  the  conceptual 
symbol  by  which  we  represent  what  we  have  termed 
material  groups  of  sense-impressions,  while  ether- 
matter  will  be  a  name  for  the  symbol  by  which  we 
describe  other  phases  of  sense-impression,  especially 
the  correlation  in  space  and  time  of  sense-impressions 
belonging  to  diverse  material  groups.  We  shall  not 
project  our  conceptions  into  imperceptibles  in  the  field 
of  perception  (!) T — -except  in  so  far  as  it  may  be 
necessary  in  order  to  criticize  current  physical  notions. 
We  shall  try  and  preserve  throughout  the  standpoint 
that  science  is  a  description  of  perceptual  experience 
by  aid  of  conceptual  shorthand,  the  symbols  of  this 
shorthand  being  in  general  ideal  limits  to  perceptual 
processes,  and  as  such  having  no  exact  perceptual 
equivalents. 

The  reduction  of  "  matter  to  non-matter  in  motion," 
of  heavy-matter  to  ether-matter  in  motion,  is  so  im- 
portant as  a  possible  simplification  of  our  scientific 
analysis  of  phenomena  that  we  must  devote  a  few 
pages  to  its  discussion.  We  will  term  the  fundamental 
element  of  heavy  matter,  the  element  out  of  which, 

1  The  reader  may  perhaps  expect  the  words  "unperceived  things" 
father  than  "  imperceptibles."  But  as  every  external  perception  is  a 
group  of  sense-impressions,  and  as  our  senses  are  limited,  the  atom,  if  a 
real  phenomena,  could  only  appear  sensible  by  colour,  hardness,  tem- 
perature, &c.,  the  very  sense-impressions  it  is  conceived  to  describe. 
Hence,  if  the  atom  is  to  be  not  these  things  but  their  source,  it  may  be 
truly  termed  imperceptible. 


MATTER,  313 

perhaps,  chemical  atoms  themselves  are  to  be  con- 
ceived as  built  up,  the  prime-atom.  We  have,  them 
to  ask  what  types  of  motion  in  the  ether  have  been 
suggested  as  possible  forms  for  the  prime-atom. 
There  are  two  suggestions  to  which  reference  may  be 
made,  both  of  which  depend  upon  our  postulating  the 
same  constitution  for  the  ether.  We  must  here  make 
a  brief  digression  in  order  to  throw  some  light  on  this 
constitution  of  the  ether. 

§  g.—  TAe  Ether  as  «  Perfect  Fluid"  and  "  Perfect  Jelly." 
The  reader  is  certainly  acquainted  with  two  types 
of  perceptual  bodies  which  may  be  roughly  described 
as  liquid  and  elastic.  As  specimens  of  these  two  types 
we  will  take  water  and  jelly.  As  substances  water 
and  jelly  have  a  remarkable  agreement  in  one  respect 
and  a  remarkable  divergence  in  another.  If  we  put 
either  water  or  jelly  into  a  cylinder  closed  at  the 
bottom  and  attempt  to  compress  them  by  aid  of  a 
heavily-loaded  piston,  we  shall  find  that  the  compres- 
sion is  either  insensible  or  of  very  small  amount  indeed. 
Careful  experiments  with  elaborate  apparatus  show 
that  these  substances  are  compressible,  but  the  amount 
of  compression,  although  measurable,  is  exceedingly 
minute  as  compared,  for  example,  with  the  amount 
that  air  would  be  compressed  by  the  same  load.  We 
express  this  result  by  saying  that  both  water  and  jelly, 
offer  great  resistance  to  one  form  of  strain,  namely, 
change  of  size  (p.  243).  But  this  resistance  is  only 
relative,  relative  to  other  substances,  such  as  gases, 
and  to  the  machinery  of  compression  at  our  disposal. 
So  far  as  our  perceptive  experience  goes  there  is  no 
substance  which  resists  absolutely  all  change  of  size, 
and  for  which  change  of  size  is  impossible.  Hence 


314  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

an  incompressible  substance  is  merely  a  conceptual 
limit  which  has  not  its  equivalent  in  the  world  of 
phenomena,  but  which  is  reached  in  conception  by 
carrying  on  indefinitely  a  process  (or  a  classification 
of  compressible  bodies)  starting  in  perception. 

Turning  from  this  agreement  to  the  divergence 
between  water  and  jelly,  we  remark  that  if  a  lath  of 
wood  or  even  a  knife-blade  be  pressed  downwards  on 
a  jelly  it  requires  considerable  effort  to  shear  or 
separate  the  jelly  into  two  parts  ;  on  the  other  hand, 
the  water  is  separated  by  the  lath  without  any  sensible 
resistance.  Now  the  change  of  shape  we  are  in  this 
case  concerned  with  is  of  the  nature  of  a  slide  (p.  245), 
and  we  say  that  the  water  offers  little  and  the  jelly 
considerable  resistance  to  sliding  strain.  Here,  again, 
the  question  of  the  amount  of  resistance  is  relative. 
So  far  as  our  perceptual  experience  goes,  all  fluids 
offer  some,  however  small,  resistance  to  the  sliding  of 
their  parts  over  each  other.  The  fluid  which  offers 
absolute  resistance  to  compression  and  no  resistance 
at  all  to  slide  of  its  parts, — or  the  parts  of  which  slip 
over  each  other  without  anything  of  the  nature  of 
frictional  action, — is  only  a  conceptual  limit.  Such  a 
fluid  is  termed  a  perfect  fluid.  On  the  other  hand;  by 
proceeding  to  the  opposite  limit  in  the  case  of  an 
incompressible  jelly,  that  is,  by  supposing  it  to  resist 
absolutely  change  of  shape  by  sliding,  we  should 
obtain  a  body  incapable  of  changing  its  form  by  either 
compression  or  slide,  and  thus  reach  that  conceptual 
limit,  the  rigid  body.  If  we  suppose  absolute  resistance 
to  compression  and  partial  resistance  to  slide,  we  have 
in  conception  a  medium  which  might  perhaps  be  de- 
scribed as  a  perfect  jelly. 

Returning  now  to  our  ether,  we  note  that  physicists 


MATTER.  315 

conceive  it  incompressible,  but  that  for  some  purposes 
they  appear  to  treat  it  as  a  perfect  fluid,  for  other 
purposes  as  a  perfect  jelly .*  This  might  at  first  sight 
appear  a  contradiction  or  conflict  of  conceptions,  and 
it  does  undoubtedly  involve  difficulties  which  physicists 
are  at  present  far  from  having  thoroughly  mastered. 
If  we  consider  the  ether  as  purely  conceptual,  then,  in 
order  to  describe  different  phases  of  phenomena,  we 
are  certainly  at  liberty  to  first  consider  it  as  of  one 
nature  and  then  as  of  another.  But  in  doing  so  it  is 
evident  that  we  are  leaving  room  for  a  wider  concep- 
tion which  will  resume  both  phases  of  phenomena  at 
once,  and  will  not  lead  us  into  logical  contradictions 
if  both  phases  have  to  be  dealt  with  in  the  same  in- 
vestigation. Thus,  if  the  ether  as  a  perfect  fluid 
enables  us  to  describe  atoms  by  its  types  of  motion, 
and  the  ether  as  a  perfect  jelly  enables  us  to  describe 
the  radiation  of  light,  it  is  clear  that  when  we  treat 
the  atom  as  a  source  of  light-radiations,  we  may  get 
into  serious  confusion  by  the  conception  that  the 
ether  is  at  the  same  time  a  perfect  fluid  and  a  perfect 
jelly.  We  are  compelled,  indeed,  to  try  and  find 
some  reconciliation  between  these  two  conceptions. 
If  we  turn  to  perceptual  experience  for  a  suggestion, 
we  may  note  that  water  is  the  principal  component 
of  jelly,  and  may,  by  the  addition  of  more  or  less 
gelatinous  material,  be  stiffened  to  a  jelly  of  any  con- 
sistency. In  the  like  manner  we  can  conceive  a  series 
of  perfect  jellies  formed,  ranging  in  their  resistance 
to  slide,  from  the  perfect  fluid,  through  all  stages  of 
viscosity,  up  to  the  perfectly  rigid  body.  We  might, 
then,  out  of  this  series  of  jellies  choose  one  which, 
for  slid  ing  strains  of  a  certain  magnitude,  was  sensibly 

1  For  further  purposes  again  scarcely  as  either. 


316  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

a  perfect  fluid,  while  for  smaller  strains,  such  as  are 
involved  in  the  theory  of  light-radiation,  it  would  act 
as  a  perfect  jelly.  This  is  the  solution  propounded  in 
1845  by  Sir  George  G.  Stokes,1  and  it  may  be  termed 
the  jelly-theory  of  the  ether.  The  jelly- theory  of  the 
ether  has  undoubtedly  been  of  value  in  simplifying 
many  of  our  conceptions  of  physical  phenomena,  but 
how  far  it  can  be  reconciled  with  any  system  of  ether- 
motion  as  a  basis  for  the  prime-atom  yet  awaits 
investigation.2 

There  is  another  possibility  to  which  I  can  only 
briefly  refer  here — namely,  that  the  ether  is  to  be 
conceived  as  a  perfect  fluid,  but  that  just  as  a  certain 
type  of  motion  of  this  ether  corresponds  to  the 
atom,  so  types  of  motion  may  be  used  to  stiffen  the 
ether,  or  to  give  it  elastic  rigidity.  The  ether  may  be 
a  perfect  fluid,  but,  owing  to  the  turbulence  of  its 
motion,  it  may  act  for  certain  purposes  as  a  perfect 
jelly.  This  hypothesis  will  be  better  appreciated 
when  I  have  said  a  few  words  as  to  the  ether-motions 
which  may  constitute  the  prime-atom. 

§  10. — The  Vortex-Ring  Atom  and  the  Ether- Squirt  Atom. 

In  constructing  an  atom  out  of  an  ether-motion 
we  have  first  to  gain  some  idea  of  how  it  is  possible 
that  ether,  not  being  itself  hard  or  resisting  change 

1  Mathematical  and  Physical  Papers,  vol.  i.  pp.   125-29,  and  vol. 
ii.  pp.  12-13.     The  present  writer  considers,  however,  that  there  is  a 
difference  in  quality  as  well  as  in  degree  between  a  viscous  fluid  and  an 
elastic  medium.    The  complete  difference  in  type  between  the  equations 
of  a  plastic  solid  and  a  viscous  fluid  is  sufficient  evidence  of  this.     In 
the  former  case,  any  shear  above  a  certain  magnitude  produces  set ;  in 
the  latter  any  shear  whatever,  if  continued  long  enough. 

2  For  example,  Sir  William  Thomson's  vortex  atom  would  hardly  be 
a  possibility. 


MATTER.  317 

of  shape,  can  yet  be  conceived  to  produce  the  sen- 
sations   of  hardness    and  resistance   by  its   motion. 
Some  general  idea  can  easily  be  got  of  the  sort  of 
resistance  produced  by  particular  types  of  motion  in 
the  following  manner  :    Take  an  ordinary  spinning- 
top,  and  suppose  we  succeed  by  great  care  in  balancing 
it  on  its  peg.     Clearly  the  least  touch  of  the  hand  will 
upset  it ;  it  offers  no  resistance  to  the  motion  of  the 
hand.     The  same  remark  applies  if  the  peg  of  the 
top  were  fixed  by  a  ball-and-socket  joint  to  the  table. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  top  be  set  spinning, 
we  shall  find  the  case  entirely  altered  ;  it  will  now 
present  considerable  resistance  to  being  upset,  and,  if 
partially  turned  round  its  ball-and-socket  joint,  will 
tend  to  return  to  the  old  vertical  position.     A  con- 
siderable number  of  such  spinning-tops  would  offer  a 
large  amount  of  resistance  to  a  hand  passed  over  the 
table  at   a  less   distance   than   their   height.      This 
example  may  perhaps  bring  home  to  the  reader  how 
a  certain  type  of  motion  may  suffice  to  stiffen  a  body 
not  otherwise   stiff.      Another   example  of  motion 
stiffening  a  body  is  the  smoke-ring,  with  which  most 
devotees  of  tobacco  are  well  acquainted.     Two  such 
smoke-rings  will  not  coalesce ;  they  pass  through  or 
wriggle  round  each  other,  and  round  solid  corners 
which  come   in   their   way,   and,  furthermore,   their 
relative  motion  is  easily  seen  to  closely  depend  upon 
their   relative   position.      Now    we   see  smoke-rings 
because  the  moist  particles  in  the  smoke  render  the 
gaseous    mixture  visible,  as  similar  particles  render 
steam  visible  ;    but  we  might  blow  air-rings  in  air, 
which  would  act  precisely  as  the  smoke-rings  do,  only 
they   would   be   invisible.      Such   rings   are   termed 
vortex-rings ;   and   if  we    study  the  action  of  such 


3l8  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

rings  not  in  air  or  water  but  in  our  conceptual  per- 
fect fluid,  we  shall  find  that,  like  atoms,  they  retain 
their  own  individuality ;  they  enter  into  combination, 
but  cannot  be  created  or  destroyed.  This  is  the  basis  of 
Sir  William  Thomson's  vortex-ring  theory  of  matter 
—a  prime  atom,  according  to  his  theory,  is  an  ether 
vortex-ring.1  By  the  aid  of  vortex-motion,  or  spin- 
ning elements  of  liquid  in  a  liquid,  we  are  also  able 
to  conceive  a  liquid  stiffened  up  to  a  required  degree 
of  resistance  to  sliding  strain,  and  thus  to  replace  the 
ether  as  a  perfect  jelly  by  the  ether  as  a  perfect  fluid 
in  a  turbulent  condition.2  We  can  then  dispense  with 
Sir  George  Stokes'  hypothesis  of  slight  viscosity.  But 
however  suggestive  these  ideas  may  be  for  the  lines 
upon  which  we  may  in  future  work  out  our  concep- 
tions of  ether  and  atom,  they  are  very  far  indeed  from 
being  at  present  worked  out,  and  there  are  many 
difficulties  in  the  vortex-atom  theory — notably  that 
of  deducing  gravitation — which  the  present  writer  is 
not  very  hopeful  will  ever  be  surmounted. 

While  Sir  William  Thomson's  theory  supposes 
that  the  substratum  of  an  atom  always  consists  of  the 
same  elements  of  moving  ether,  the  author  has  ven- 
tured to  put  forward  a  theory  in  which,  while  the 
ether  is  still  looked  upon  as  a  perfect  fluid,  the  indi- 
vidual atom  does  not  always  consist  of  the  same  ele- 
ments of  ether.  In  this  theory  an  atom  is  conceived 
to  be  a  point  at  which  ether  flows  in  all  directions 

1  For  a  fuller  account  of  this   theory  see    Clerk-Maxwell's   article 
"  Atom,"    in  the  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  or  his  Scientific  Papers, 
vol.  ii.  pp.  445-84.     See  also  as  to  spin  producing  elastic  resistance  Sir 
William  Thomson's  Popular  Lectures  and  Addresses,  vol.  i.  pp.  142-46 
and  235-52. 

2  See  G.  F.  Fitzgerald  :  "  On  an  Electro-magnetic  Interpretation  of 
Turbulent  Fluid  Motion,"  Nature,  vol.  xl.  pp.  32-4. 


MATTER.  319 

into  space  ;  such  a  point  is  termed  an  ether-squirt. 
An  ether-squirt  in  the  ether  is  thus  something  like  a 
tap  turned  on  under  water,  except  that  the  machinery 
of  the  tap  is  dispensed  with  in  the  case  of  the  squirt. 
Two  such  squirts,  if  placed  in  ether,  move  rela- 
tively to  each  other,  exactly  like  two  gravitating 
particles,  the  mass  of  either  corresponding  to  the 
mean  'rate  at  which  ether  is  poured  in  at  the 
squirt.  From  periodic  variations  of  the  rate  of 
squirting,  as  influenced  by  the  mutual  action  of 
groups  of  squirts,  we  are  able  to  deduce  many  of  the 
phenomena  of  chemical  action,  cohesion,  light,  and 
electro-magnetism.  Indeed  the  ether-squirt  seems  a 
conceptual  mechanism  capable  of  describing  a  very 
considerable  range  of  phenomena.  It  involves,  of 
course,  the  conception  of  negative  matter,  or  ether- 
sinks  ;  for  the  amount  squirted  into  an  incompressible 
fluid  must  be  at  least  equalled  by  the  amount  which 
passes  out.  As,  however,  an  ether-squirt  and  an 
ether-sink  must  be  conceived  to  repel  each  other, 
there  need  be  no  surprise  that  we  are  compelled  to 
consider  our  portion  of  the  universe  as  built  up  of 
positive  matter ;  the  negative  matter,  or  ether-sinks, 
would  long  ago  have  passed  out  of  the  range  of  ether- 
squirts.1 

ii. — A  Material  Loophole  into  the  Super  sensuous. 
Now  the  reader  may  naturally  ask  :  Where  can  we 

1  Carnelley,  however,  demanded  an  element  of  negative  atomic 
weight,  and  a  substance  of  negative  weight  is  by  no  means  incon- 
ceivable. Should  the  reader  be  interested  in  a  mathematical  account 
of  this  theory  he  may  consult  :  "  Ether-squirts;  Being  an  Attempt  to 
Specialize  the  Form  of  Ether-Motion  which  forms  an  Atom  in  a  Theory 
propounded  in  former  Papers,"  American  Journal  of  Mathematics ;  vol. 
xiii.  pp.  309-62.  See  also  Camb.  Phil.  Trans,  vol.  xiv.  p.  71 ;  London 
Math.  Society,  vol.  xx.  pp.  38  and  297. 


32O  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

conceive  the  ether  to  come  from  when  it  pours  in  at 
the  squirt  or  prime-atom  ?  In  taking  the  ether-squirt 
as  a  model  dynamical  system  for  the  atom,  we  are 
not  bound  to  answer  this  question  in  order  to  demon- 
strate its  validity,  any  more  than  we  are  bound  to 
explain  why  ether  and  atom  themselves  come  to  be. 
From  our  standpoint,  they  are  justified  as  conceptions 
if  they  enable  us  to  resume  our  perceptual  experi- 
ence. But  as  there  are  many  who  will  insist  on  project- 
ing the  conceptual  into  the  phenomenal  field,  I  will 
endeavour  to  answer  the  question  by  suggestion. 

Suppose  we  had  two  opaque  horizontal  plane  sur- 
faces placed  close  together,  and  containing  between 
them  water  in  which  lived  a  flat  fish,  say  a  flounder. 
Now  it  is  clear  that  the  perceptions  of  our  fish  would 
be  limited  to  motion  forwards  or  backwards,  to  right 
or  to  left,  but  vertically  upwards  or  downwards 
would  be  an  imperceptible,  and  therefore  probably 
inconceivable,  motion  for  him.  Now  let  us  pass  in 
conception  to  a  limit  unrealizable  in  perception  ;  let 
us  suppose  our  flounder  to  get  flatter  and  flatter, 
and  the  film  of  water  thinner  and  thinner,  as  the 
planes  are  pressed  closer  together.  The  motion 
of  the  flounder  and  the  motion  of  the  water  may 
then,  for  conceptual  purposes,  be  supposed  to  take 
place  in  one  horizontal  plane.  Now  if  we  were  to 
make  a  hole  in  one  of  the  planes  and  squirt  water  in,  it 
is  clear  that  our  flounder  would  experience  new  sense- 
impressions  when  he  came  into  the  neighbourhood  of 
the  squirt.  Indeed  the  pressure  produced  by  the 
flow  of  water  might  compel  the  flounder  to  circum- 
navigate the  squirt — that  is,  the  squirt  might  be  for 
him  hard  and  impenetrable.  Such  squirts,  although 
only  water  in  motion,  might  form  very  material  groups 


MATTER.  321 

of  sense-impressions  for  our  fish.  If,  however,  he 
were  told  that  matter  was  formed  of  squirts,  he  would 
be  quite  unable  to  conceive  where  the  squirt  came 
from.  It  could  be  from  neither  forwards  nor  back- 
wards, neither  from  right  nor  left,  for.  it  flows  in  in  all 
these  directions.  The  flounder  would  presume  we 
were  quite  mad  did  we  suggest  that  the  water  came 
vertically  upwards  or  downwards  ;  that  there  was 
another  direction  in  space — "  upward  and  outward  in 
the  direction  of  his  stomach,"  as  the  author  of  Flat- 
land^-  felicitously  expresses  it.  Could  the  flounder 
get  out  of  his  space  through  the  squirt — through  and 
out  in  the  direction  of  matter — he  would  reach  a  new 


FIG.  20. 

world,  wherein  he  would  perceive  what  squirts  were, 
what  his  matter  really  consisted  in.  Through  the 
eye  of  the  needle,  out  through  the  matter  of  flatland, 
the  flounder  would  reach  the  heaven  of  our  three- 
dimensioned  space,  where  we  go  up  and  down,  as 
well  as  forward  and  backward,  and  to  right  and  left. 
But  for  the  flounder  this  "  out  through  matter  " 
would  remain  inconceivable,  not  to  say  ridiculous  ;  it 
would  be  to  penetrate  behind  the  surface  of  sense- 
impressions. 

Now  this  parable  of  the  flounder  is   specially  in- 

1  Flatland:  a  Rotnance  of  Many  Dimensions,  by  A  Square.    London, 
1884. 

22 


322  THE  GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

tended  for  those  minds  which,  strive  as  they  will, 
cannot  wholly  repress  their  metaphysical  tendencies, 
which  must  project  their  conceptions  into  realities 
beyond  perception.  The  danger  of  this  meta- 
physical speculation  lies  in  the  frequency  with  which 
it  contradicts  our  perceptual  experience  when  it 
passes  from  the  "  beyond  "  of  sense-impression  to  the 
world  of  phenomena.  Now  a  happy  conception  as  to 
how  the  prime-atom  is  to  be  constructed,  fitting  in 
with  all  our  perceptual  experience  (that  is,  enabling 
us  to  describe  it  symbolically  with  great  accuracy), 
might  leave  a  loophole  for  the  metaphysical  mind  to 
pass  to  something  which  does  not  symbolize  the  per- 
ceptual, and  therefore  might  dogmatically  be  assumed 
to  belong  to  the  supersensuous.  Out  from  our  space 
through  the  ether-squirt,  out  through  matter  we  in 
conception  pass,  like  the  flounder,  to  another  dimen- 
sioned space.  This  space  has  for  a  number  of  years 
past  formed  the  subject  of  elaborate  investigations  by 
some  of  our  best  mathematicians,1  and  it  possesses 
this  great  advantage :  that  when  we  pass  from  the 
conclusions  drawn  for  this  higher  space  to  the  space 
of  our  perceptual  experience,  then  we  are  not  involved 
in  the  contradictions  which  abound  in  the  transition 
from  the  older  metaphysics  to  our  physical  experi- 
ence. Here  in  this  new  playroom,  entered,  perhaps,  by 
the  doorway  of  matter,  metaphysician  and  theologian 
can  for  the  present  safely  spin  beyond  the  sensible 
the  cobwebs,  which  have  been  swept  away  by  the 
scientific  broom  whenever  they  encumbered  the 
habitable  apartments  of  knowledge.  The  necessary 
mathematical  equipment  required  for  genuine  re- 
search in  the  field  of  higher-dimensioned  space  will 

1  Riemann,  Helmholtz,  Beltrami,  and  Clifford. 


MATTER.  323 

at  any  rate  act  as  a  safeguard  against  over  light- 
hearted  expeditions  "beyond  the  sensible"!  Should  a 
time  ever  come,  which  may,  perhaps,  be  doubted,  when 
a  happy  conception  as  to  the  structure  of  the  prime- 
atom  is  discovered  to  be  a  perceptual  fact,  then  if  such 
a  conception  involves  the  existence  of  four-dimen- 
sioned space,1  our  friends  will  have  done  yeoman 
service  in  preparing  a  way  for  a  scientific  theory 
of  the  supersensuous — out  through  the  doorway  of 
matter  ! 

§   1 2.—  The  Difficulties  of  a  Perceptual  Ether. 

But  we  have  romanced  enough  for  the  sake  of 
the  metaphysically-minded.  Returning  to  the  solid 
ground  of  fact,  we  have  to  remember  that  no 
hypothesis  as  to  the  structure  of  the  prime-atom 
from  ether  in  motion  is  at  present  scientifically 
accepted  ;  no  model  dynamical  system  for  the  atom 
has  as  yet  been  shown  to  have  such  a  wide-reaching 
power  of  describing  our  perceptual  experience  that  it 
has  passed  from  the  field  of  imagination  and  become 
a  current  symbol  of  scientific  shorthand.  Nor  is  the 
reason  far  to  seek  ;  we  desire  to  construct,  if  pos- 
sible, the  prime-atom  from  an  ether-motion,  but  our 
conceptions  of  the  ether  are  at  present  very  ill-defined. 

1  The  ether-squirt  is  not  the  only  atomic  theory  which  suggests  a 
space  beyond  our  own.  Clifford  imagined  matter  to  be  a  wrinkle  in 
our  space,  which  suggests  the  idea  of  another  space  to  bend  it  in.  This 
notion  of  Clifford's  may,  perhaps,  be  brought  home  to  our  reader  by 
imagining  the  flounder  rigidly  flat  and  a  crumple  or  wrinkle  in  his 
plane  of  motion.  The  wrinkle  would,  like  matter,  be  impenetrable  to 
the  fish  ;  he  could  not  fit  it ;  either  the  wrinkle  or  he  would  have  to 
get  out  of  the  way.  This  non-fitting  of  two  kinds  of  space  has  not 
hitherto,  however,  been  developed  as  a  mode  of  describing  any  of  our 
fundamental  physical  experiences. 


324  THE   GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

We  are  agreed  that  it  must  be  conceived  as  a 
medium  which  resists  strain,  but  we  are  not  certain 
how  to  represent  best  the  relative  motions  that  follow 
on  relative  change  in  the  position  of  the  ether-ele- 
ments. We  are  not  yet  satisfied  with  a  perfect  fluid, 
a  perfect  jelly,  or  even  a  turbulent  perfect  fluid  con- 
ception of  the  ether. 

Treating  the  ether  not  as  a  conception  but  as  a 
phenomenon,  we  find  it  difficult  to  realize  how  a  con- 
tinuous and  same  medium  could  offer  any  resistance 
to  a  sliding  motion  of  its  parts,  for  the  continuity  and 
sameness  would  involve,  after  any  displacement,  every- 
thing being  the  same  as  before  displacement  The 
idea  of  a  perfect  jelly  appears  to  involve  some  change 
in  structure  as  we  magnify  smaller  and  smaller 
elements  larger  and  larger.  Finally,  any  relative 
motion  of  translation  as  distinct  from  one  of  rotation 
seems  excluded  by  the  idea  of  absolute  incom- 
pressibility.1  It  is  not  a  metaphysical  quibble  when 
we  demand  that  two  things  shall  not  occupy  the 
same  space,  but  that  when  motion  begins  there  shall 
be  somewhere  unoccupied  for  something  to  move  into. 
The  obvious  fact  is  that  while  in  conception  we  can 
represent  the  moving  parts  of  the  ether  as  points,  and 
we  can  endow  these  points  with  such  relative  velocities 
and  accelerations  as  will  best  describe  our  perceptual 
experience,  yet  when  we  project  the  ether  into  the 
phenomenal  world  it  is  at  once  recognized  as  a  concep- 
tual limit  unparalleled  in  perceptual  experience,  and 
we  do  not  feel  at  home  with  it.  The  old  problems  as 
to  "  heavy  matter "  recur.  What  is  the  ultimate 
element  of  the  ether  which  moves  ?  and  why  does  it 

*  For  absolutely  incompressible  elements  (other  than  points)  motion 
round  any  closed  curve  other  than  a  circle  seems  inconceivable. 


MATTER.  325 

move  ?  Build  a  perceptual  matter  out  of  a  pheno- 
menal ether,  and  we  have  again  thrust  upon  us  the 
question  as  to  ether-matter's  nature.  Is  it  also  to  be 
a  terra  incognita  mine  et  in  ceternum  ?  The  mind 
again  fails  to  rest  in  peace  until  it  reaches  somewhere 
the  motion  of  a  point,  the  sizeless  ultimate  element 
of  matter  postulated  by  Boscovich.  We  find  our- 
selves again  involved  in  the  contradictions  which 
flow  from  asserting  a  reality  for  motion  in  the  phe- 
nomenal field.  We  are  again  forced  to  the  conclusion 
that  motion  is  a  pure  conception,  which  may  describe 
perceptual  changes,  but  cannot  be  projected  into  the 
phenomenal  world  without  involving  us  in  inexpli- 
cable difficulties. 

§  13.—  Why  do  Bodies  Move  ? 

We  have  left  but  little  space  for  the  discussion  of 
our  second  question  :  Why  do  bodies  move  ?  But 
the  answer  to  this  question  must  be  clear  after  what 
precedes.  If  we  mean  :  Why  do  sense-impressions 
change  in  a  certain  manner  ? — then  we  have  already 
seen  what  are  the  possibilities  of  knowledge  on  this 
point  when  considering  consciousness,  the  nature  of 
the  perceptive  faculty  and  the  routine  of  perceptions 
(pp.  122-9).  If  we  mean:  Why  do  the  geometrical 
symbols  by  which  we  conceptualize  material  groups 
of  sense-impressions  move  in  a  certain  fashion  ? — 
then  the  answer  is,  that  after  many  guesses  we  have 
found  these  types  of  motion  to  be  best  capable  of 
describing  the  past  and  predicting  the  future  routine 
of  our  perceptions.  If,  however,  any  one  persists  in 
phenomenalizing  our  conceptual  symbols  of  motion, 
then  science  can  only  reply  to  this  question  :  Why 
does  matter  move  ?  We  don't  know.  Let  us  suppose 


326  THE  GRAMMAR   OF  SCIENCE. 

that  the  earth  actually  moves  in  an  ellipse  round  the 
sun  in  a  focus,  and  then  let  us  attempt  to  analyze  the 
why  of  it.  Well,  conceptually  we  construct  this 
motion  out  of  a  certain  relative  motion  of  the  ele- 
mentary parts  of  sun  and  earth.  We  say  that  if  these 
elementary  parts  have  certain  relative  accelerations 
when  in  each  other's  presence,  then  the  earth  will 
describe  an  ellipse  about  the  sun.  These  elementary 
parts  may  be  looked  upon  as  atoms  or  groups  of 
atoms,  but  to  save  any  hypothesis  let  us  simply  term 
them  particles  of  matter.  Now,  why  do  two  particles 
when  in  each  other's  presence  move  relative  to  each 
other  in  a  certain  fashion  ?  It  will  not  do  to  answer  : 
Owing  to  the  law  of  gravitation.  That  merely  de- 
scribes how  they  move.  Nor  can  we  say  :  Owing  to 
the  force  of  gravitation.  That  is  merely  throwing  the 
answer  on  the  beyond  of  sense-impression — it  is  the 
metaphysical  method  of  avoiding  saying  :  We  don't 
know. 

When  we  see  two  persons  dancing  round  each 
other  we  assume  that  they  do  it  because  they  wish  to, 
because  they  will  to.  They  cannot  be  said,  if  one  is 
not  holding  the  other,  to  enforce  each  other's  motion. 
To  attribute  the  dance  to  their  common  will  is  the  sole 
explanation  we  can  give  of  it.1  When  we  find  the  ulti- 
mate particles  of  matter  dancing  about  each  other,  we 
can  hardly,  like  Schopenhauer,  attribute  it  to  their 
common  will  to  dance  thus,  because  will  denotes  the 
presence  of  consciousness,  and  consciousness  we  can- 
not logically  infer  unless  there  be  certain  types  of 
material  sense-impressions  associated  with  it.  Thus 
will,  if  it  had  any  meaning  as  a  cause  of  motion — 
which  we  have  seen  it  has  not  (p.  150) — could  not 

1  See  Appendix,  Note   V, 


MATTER.  327 

help  us  with  regard  to  our  dance  of  material  particles. 
All  we  can  scientifically  say  is,  that  the  cause  of  their 
motion  is  their  relative  position  ;  but  this  is  no  expla- 
nation of  why  they  move  when  in  that  position.  The 
difficulty  cannot  be  surmounted  by  appealing  to  the 
notion  of  force.  Of  the  metaphysical  conception  of 
force  we  have  said  enough  (pp.  140  et  seq.\  and  we 
need  not  reconsider  it  here.  But  force  is  sometimes 
said  to  be  a  sense-impression — we  are  said  to  have 
a  "  muscular  sensation  "  of  force.  I  will  to  push  a 
thing  with  my  hand,  and  on  the  will  becoming  action 
a  "  muscular  sensation  "  occurs  which  is  termed  the 
exertion  of  force.  But  why  is  this  more  a  sense-im- 
pression of  force  than  a  sense-impression  of  changes 
in  the  motion,  or  of  relative  accelerations  in  the 
particles  of  my  finger-tips  ?  Add  to  this  that  the 
so-called  "  muscular  sensation  "  of  force  is  associated 
with  a  conscious  being,  or  is  a  subjective  side  of  some 
changes  of  motion  in  his  person,  and  we  see  that  it 
can  throw  absolutely  no  light  on  the  reason  why 
material  particles  move.  "  Force  is  a  direct  object  of 
sense,"  write  Sir  William  Thomson  and  Professor 
Tait1  Force  "  is  not  a  term  for  anything  objective," 
writes  Professor  Tait.2  In  the  face  of  such  contra- 
dictions, is  it  not  better  to  cease  supposing  that  any 
lucid  explanation  of  the  why  of  motion  can  be 
abstracted  from  the  idea  of  force  ? 

But  may  not  our  particles,  like  two  dancers,  hold 
hands,  and  so  the  one  "  enforce  "  the  other's  motion  ? 
We  must  not  say  that  this  holding  hands  is  impossible, 
although  they  be  90,000,000  miles  apart.  We  conceive 

1  A    Treatise  on  Natural  Philosophy,  part  i.   p.  220.      Cambridge, 

1879- 

2  The  Properties  of  Matter.    Edinburgh,  1885. 


328  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

light  as  easily  traversing  those  90,000,000  miles  by  aid 
of  the  ether,  and  may  not  our  particles  hold  hands  by 
means  of  the  ether?  All  scientists  hope  that  this 
may  be  so,  at  any  rate  conceptually,  although  they 
have  not  yet  conceived  how  it  can  be  so.  But  if  we 
phenomenalized  the  ether  and  were  able  to  describe 
by  aid  of  it  action  at  a  distance  of  millions  of  miles, 
we  should  still  be  left  with  the  problem  :  Why  does 
the  relative  position  of  two  adjacent  parts  of  ether 
influence  the  motion  of  those  parts  ?  It  might  seem 
at  first  sight  easier  to  explain  why  two  adjacent  ether 
elements  "  move  each  other "  than  why  two  distant 
particles  of  matter  do.  The  common-sense  philosopher 
is  ready  at  once  with  an  explanation :  They  pull  or 
push  each  other.  But  what  do  we  mean  by  these 
words?  A  tendency  when  a  body  is  strained  to 
resume  its  original  form  ;  a  tendency  in  a  certain 
relative  position  of  its  parts  to  a  certain  relative 
motion  of  its  parts.  But  why  does  this  motion 
follow  on  a  particular  position  ?  It  is  the  old 
problem  over  again,  with  the  difference  that  rela- 
tive position  now  involves  small  instead  of  large 
distances.  It  will  not  do  to  attribute  it  to  the  elas- 
ticity of  the  medium  ;  this  is  merely  giving  the  fact 
a  name.  We  do  indeed  try  to  describe  the  phe- 
nomenon of  elasticity  conceptually,  but  this  is  solely 
by  constructing  elastic  bodies  out  of  non-adjacent 
particles,  the  changes  of  position  of  which  we 
associate  with  certain  relative  motions.  In  other 
words,  to  appeal  to  the  conception  of  elasticity  is 
only  to  "explain"  one  "action  at  a  distance"  by  a 
second  "  action  at  a  distance."  If  the  ether-elements 
owe  their  elasticity  to  such  an  arrangement,  we  shall 
want  another  ether  to  "  explain  "  the  motion  of  the 


MATTER.  329 

first,  and  the  process  will  have  to  be  continued  ad 
infinitum.  Clearly  the  phenomenalization  of  the  ether 
is  absolutely  useless  as  a  means  of  explaining  why 
matter  moves.  It  still  leaves  us  with  the  same 
problem  in  another  form  :  Why  does  ether-matter 
move  ?  And  here  no  answer  can  be  given.  We  can- 
not proceed  for  ever  "  explaining "  mechanism  by 
mechanism.  Those,  who  insist  on  phenomenalizing 
mechanism  must  ultimately  say :  "  Here  we  are 
ignorant"  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  must  take 
refuge  in  matter  and  force.  According  to  Paul 
du  Bois-Reymond,  the  problem  of  action  at  a 
distance  is  the  third  Ignorabimus*  but  the  problem  is 
really  identical  with  that  of  Emil  du  Bois-Reymond's 
first  IgnorabimuSy  the  nature  of  matter  and  force. 

It  seems  to  me  that  we  are  ignorant  and  shall  be 
ignorant  just  as  long  as  we  project  our  conceptual 
chart,  which  symbolizes  but  is  not  the  world  of 
phenomena,  into  that  world  ;  just  as  long  as  we  try 
to  find  realities  corresponding  to  geometrical  ideals 
and  other  purely  conceptual  limits..  So  long  as  we 
do  this  we  mistake  the  object  of  science,  which  is  not 
to  explain  but  to  describe  by  conceptual  shorthand  our 
perceptual  experience.  When  we  once  clearly  recog- 
nize that  change  of  sense-impression  is  the  reality, 
motion  and  mechanism  the  descriptive  ideal,  then  the 
Brothers  du  Bois-Reymonds'  first  and  third  problems, 
and  their  cry  of  Ignorabimus  become  meaning- 
less. Matter  and  force  and  "  action  at  a  distance " 
are  witch  -  and  -  blue  -  milk  problems  (p.  27),  if 
mechanism  be  purely  a  conceptual  description. 
What  moves  in  conception  is  a  geometrical  ideal,  and 
it  moves  because  we  conceive  it  to  move.  How  it 

1  See  the  work  cited  on  our  p.  46. 


33O  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

moves  becomes  the  all-important  question,  for  it  is  the 
means  by  which  we  regulate  our  mechanism  so  as  to 
describe  our  past  and  predict  our  future  experience. 
This  how  of  motion  is  the  point  to  which  we  must 
next  turn.  The  laws  of  motion  in  the  widest  sense 
embrace  all  physical  science — perhaps  it  were  not  too 
much  to  say  all  science  whatever.  All  laws,  von  Helm- 
holtz  tells  us,  must  ultimately  be  merged  in  laws  of 
motion.  Even  such  a  complex  phenomenon  as  that  of 
heredity  is  at  bottom,  Haeckel  holds,  a  transference 
of  motion.  Strong  in  her  power  of  describing  how 
changes  take  place,  Science  can  well  afford  to  neglect 
the  why.  She  may  not  go  so  far  as  to  fully  accept 
even  Emil  du  Bois-Reymond's  second  Ignorabimus, 
so  long  at  least  as  psychology  stands  where  it  does  ; 
but  as  to  what  consciousness  is  and  why  there  is  a 
routine  of  sense-impressions  she  is  content  for  the 
present  to  say,  " Ignoramus" 

SUMMARY. 

The  notion  of  matter  is  found  to  be  equally  obscure  whether  we  seek 
for  definition  in  the  writings  of  physicists  or  of  "  common-sense " 
philosophers.  The  difficulties  with  regard  to  it  appear  to  arise  from  assert- 
ing the  phenomenal  but  imperceptible  existence  of  conceptual  symbols. 
Change  of  sense-impression  is  the  proper  term  for  external  perception, 
motion  for  our  conceptual  symbolization  of  this  change.  Of  perception 
the  questions  "  what  moves  "  and  "why  it  moves  "  are  seen  to  be  idle. 
In  the  field  of  conception  the  moving  bodies  are  geometrical  ideals. 

Of  the  du  Bois-Reymonds'  three  cries  of  Ignorabimus,  only  the 
second  in  a  modified  sense  is  scientifically  valuable,  the  others  are  un- 
intelligible, because  we  find  that  matter,  force,  and  "action  at  a  dis- 
tance "  are  not  terms  which  express  real  problems  of  the  phenomenal 
world. 


MATTER.  331 

LITERATURE. 

BOIS-REYMOND,  EMIL  DU. — Ueber  die  Grenzen  des  Naturerkennens. 
Leipzig,  1876. 

CLERK-MAXWELL,  J.— Articles  "  Atom  "  and  "  Ether  "  in  the  Encyclo- 
paedia Britannica,  reprinted  in  the  Scientific  Papers,  vol.  ii.  pp.  445 
and  763.  The  article  on  the  "  Constitution  of  Bodies  "  may  also  be 
consulted  with  advantage. 

CLIFFORD,  W.  K. — Lectures  and  Essays,  vol.  i.  ("  Atoms  "  and  "  The 
Unseen  Universe  ").  London,  1879. 

TAIT,  P.  G. — Properties  of  Matter  (especially  chaps,  i.-v.).  Edin- 
burgh, 1885. 

THOMSON,  SIR  WILLIAM. — Popular  Lectures  and  Addresses,  vol.  i. 
(especially  pp.  142-52).  London,  1889. 


CHAPTER   VIII. 

THE  LAWS  OF  MOTION. 

§  i. — Corpuscles  and  their  Structure. 

IN  the  last  chapter  we  have  seen  how  the  physicist 
conceptually  constructs  the  universe  by  aid  of  a  vast 
atomic  dance.  I  use  the  word  atom  although  it  is 
very  probably  the  ultimate  element  of  the  ether,  which 
we  ought  to  talk  about  as  the  fundamental  unit  of 
the  dance.  Let  us  term  this  latter  unit  the  ether- 
element,  without  intending  to  assert  by  the  use  of  this 
word  that  the  ether  is  necessarily  discontinuous.1 
Two  adjacent  ether-elements  will  be  the  symbols, 
necessarily  geometrical,  by  which  we  represent  the 
relative  motion  of  the  parts  of  the  ether.  On  the 
basis  of  the  ether-element  let  us  try  and  conceive 
how  the  physicist  imagines  his  mechanical  model  of 
the  universe  constructed.  Perceptual  experience 
gives  us  no  hint  as  to  what  we  ought  to  conceive 
the  ether-element  to  consist  of,  or  how  we  ought  to 
imagine  it  to  act,  if  it  could  be  isolated.  But  we  are 
compelled  to  consider  ether-elements  when  in  each 
other's  presence  as  moving  in  certain  definite  modes, 
as  taking  part  in  a  regulated  dance.  Perceptually 

1  If  we  suppose  the  ether  to  be  a  conceptual  limit  to  a  perceptual 
fluid  or  jelly  (pp.  313  and  328),  then  to  conceptualize  at  all  its  trans- 
mission of  stress  or  its  elasticity  we  are,  I  think,  compelled  to  suppose 
it  discontinuous. 


THE  LAWS   OF   MOTION.  333 

there  is  no  reason  for  this  dance,  conceptually  it 
enables  us  to  describe  the  world  of  sense-impres- 
sions. 

Probably,  although  this  point  is  far  from  being 
definitely  settled,  one  type  of  motion  among  the 
ether-elements  may  be  conceived  as  constituting  the 
prime-atom.  These  prime-atoms,  the  protyle  of 
Crookes,  are  to  be  taken  as  symbols  of  the  ultimate 
basis  of  material  groups  of  sense-impressions,  or,  in 
ordinary  language,  of  gross  or  sensible  "  matter." 
Prime-atoms  in  themselves,  or,  what  is  more  likely, 
in  groups,  form  the  atom  of  the  chemist,  the  con- 
ceptual substratum  of  the  so-called  simple  elements 
such  as  hydrogen,  oxygen,  iron,  carbon,  &c.,  by  aid 
of  which  the  chemist  classifies  all  the  known  heavy 
matter  of  the  physical  universe.  If  the  prime-atom 
of  the  physicist  is  really  the  atom  of  the  chemist, 
then  the  prime-atom  must  be  conceived  as  having 
variations  either  in  its  structure  or  in  its  type  of 
motion  corresponding  to  the  different  chemical  ele- 
ments. There  are  certain  perceptual  facts,  however, 
which  suggest  that  we  should  describe  phenomena 
best  by  conceiving  the  atom  of  the  simple  chemical 
element  to  be  constructed  from  groups  of  prime-atoms, 
the  disassociation  of  which  corresponds  to  no  defi- 
nite perceptual  results  which  the  chemist  has  hitherto 
succeeded  in  attaining.  Out  of  the  atoms  of  the 
simple  elements  the  chemist  constructs  compounds ; 
that  is,  by  combining  conceptually  these  atoms  in 
certain  groupings  he  forms  the  molecule  of  the  com- 
pound. Thus  two  atoms  of  hydrogen  and  one  of 
oxygen  are  united  to  form  the  molecule  of  water. 
Any  portion  of  the  compound  substance  itself  is 
conceived  as  composed  of  an  immense  number  of 


334  THE   GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

molecules.  In  order  to  describe  the  sense-impres- 
sions which  we  physically  associate  with  a  "  piece 
of  a  given  substance  "  we  are  bound  to  postulate 
that  the  smallest  physical  element  of  it  is  to  be  con- 
sidered as  containing  millions  of  molecules.1 

If  we  take  a  piece  of  any  substance,  say  a  bit  of 
chalk,  and  divide  it  into  small  fragments,  these  still 
possess  the  properties  of  chalk.  Divide  any  frag- 
ment again  and  again,  and  so  long  as  a  divided 
fragment  is  perceptible  by  aid  of  the  microscope  it 
still  appears  chalk.  Now  the  physicist  is  in  the  habit 
of  defining  the  smallest  portion  of  a  substance  which, 
he  conceives,  could  possess  the  physical  properties 
of  the  original  substance  as  a  particle.  The  par- 

1  The  reasons  for  this  statement  are  chiefly  drawn  from  the  Kinetic 
Theory  of  Gases.  Clerk-Maxwell  in  his  article  "Atom"  {Encyclopedia 
Britannicd)  considers  that  the  minitmtm  visibile  of  the  present  day  may 
be  conceived  as  containing  sixty  to  one  hundred  million  atoms  of  oxygen 
or  nitrogen.  He  proceeds  to  draw  from  this  result  conclusions,  which  I 
think  quite  unwarranted,  as  to  our  power  of  describing  by  aid  of  molecular 
structure  the  physiological  facts  of  heredity.  He  remarks  that  :  "  Since 
the  molecules  of  organised  substances  contain  on  an  average  fifty  of  the 
more  elementary  atoms,  we  may  assume  that  the  smallest  particle 
visible  under  the  microscope  contains  about  two  million  molecules  of 
organic  matter.  At  least  half  of  every  living  organism  consists  of  water, 
so  that  the  smallest  living  being  visible  under  the  microscope  does  not 
contain  more  than  about  a  million  organic  molecules.  Some  exceedingly 
simple  organism  may  be  supposed  built  up  of  not  more  than  a  million 
similar  molecules.  It  is  impossible,  however,  to  conceive  so  small  a 
number  sufficient  to  form  a  being  furnished  with  a  whole  system  of 
specialized  organs." 

This  reasoning  is  simply  a  form  of  special  pleading  based  on  the  assump- 
tion that  variations  in  physiological  organs  depend  solely  on  chemical 
constitution  and  not  on  physical  structure.  Why  are  we  to  put  on  one 
side  the  facts  that  there  are  upwards  of  fifty  atoms  in  the  organic 
molecule,  that  there  is  a  certain  proportion  of  water,  and  that  these 
organic  molecules  must  be  conceived  as  closely  packed  into  a  scarce 
visible  germ  ?  Why  are  these  one  hundred  million  atoms  not  to  be 
conceived  as  physically  influencing  each  other's  motion  ?  If  this  be  so, 


THE  LAWS  OF   MOTION.  335 

ticle  is  thus  a  purely  conceptual  notion,  for  we 
cannot  say  when  we  should  reach  the  exact  limit  of 
subdivision  at  which  the  physical  properties  of  the 
substance  would  cease  to  be.  But  the  particle  is  of 
great  value  in  our  conceptual  model  of  the  universe,  for 
we  represent  its  motion  by  the  motion  of  a  geometrical 
point.  In  other  words,  we  suppose  it  to  have  solely  a 
motion  of  translation  (pp.  237  and  246) ;  we  neglect  its 
motions  of  rotation  and  of  strain.  The  physicist  has 
here  reached  a  purely  conceptual  limit  to  perceptual 
experience  ;  he  takes  a  smaller  and  smaller  element 
of  gross  "  matter,"  and  supposing  it  always  to  be  of 
the  same  substance  (i.e.,  to  produce  the  same  sense- 
impressions  although  it  becomes  imperceptible),  he 
deals  with  it  as  a  moving  point.  What  right  has  the 
physicist  to  invent  this  ideal  particle  ?  He  has  never 
perceived  the  limiting  quantity,  the  minimum  esse  of 
a  substance,  and  therefore  cannot  assert  that  it  would 
not  produce  in  him  sense-impressions  which  could 
only  be  described  by  aid  of  the  concepts  spin  and 
strain.  The  logical  right  of  the  physicist  is,  however, 
exactly  that  on  which  all  scientific  conceptions  are 
based.  We  have  to  ask  whether  postulating  an  ideal 

then  their  relative  position,  the  structure  of  the  germ  as  a  dynamical 
system,  may  be  shown  to  involve  no  less  than  10,000  million  million 
periodic  motions,  having  various  relative  positions  in  space,  and  apart 
from  this  relative  position  having  in  amplitude,  phase,  and  "  note," 
three  hundred  million  variables  at  the  disposal  of  the  physiologist  ! 
Whether  heredity  can  or  cannot  be  described  by  the  influence  of  such  a 
molecular  structure  on  other  molecules  is  quite  beyond  our  present 
scientific  knowledge  to  determine  ;  but  we  certainly  cannot  dogmatically 
assert  with  Maxwell  that  :  "  Molecular  science  sets  us  face  to  face  with 
physiological  theories.  It  forbids  the  physiologist  from  imagining  that 
structural  details  of  infinitely  small  dimensions  can  furnish  an  explana- 
tion of  the  infinite  variety  which  exists  in  the  properties  and  functions 
of  the  most  minute  organism  ." 


336  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

of  this  sort  enables  us  to  construct  out  of  the  motion 
of  groups  of  particles  those  more  complex  motions  by 
aid  of  which  we  describe  the  physical  universe.  Is 
the  particle  a  symbol  by  aid  of  which  we  can  describe 
our  past  and  predict  our  future  sequences  of  sense- 
impressions  with  a  great  and  uniform  degree  of 
accuracy  ?  If  it  be,  then  its  use  is  justified  as  a 
scientific  method  of  simplifying  our  ideas  and  econo- 
mizing thought. 

The  reader  must  note  that  this  hypothesis  of  the 
particle  is  made  use  of  by  Newton  in  the  statement 
of  his  law  of  gravitation  :  "  Every  particle  of  matter 
in  the  universe  attracts  every  other  particle"  he  tells 
us,  in  such  and  such  a  manner.  Yet  Newton  is  here 
dealing  with  conceptual  notions,  for  he  never  saw,  nor 
has  any  physicist  since  his  time  ever  seen,  individual 
particles,  or  been  able  to  examine  how  the  motion  of 
two  such  particles  is  related  to  their  position.  The 
justification  of  the  law  of  gravitation  lies  in  the  power 
it  gives  us  of  constructing  the  motion  of  the  groups  of 
particles  by  aid  of  which  we  symbolize  physical  bodies 
and  ultimately  describe  and  predict  the  routine  of 
our  sense-impressions.  The  particle,  therefore,  as  the 
symbolic  unit  of  physical  substance  with  its  simple 
motion  of  translation  is  as  valid  as  the  law  of  gravita- 
tion, in  the  statement  of  which  it  is  indeed  involved. 

Lastly,  groups  of  particles  bounded  in  conception 
by  continuous  surfaces  are  the  symbols  by  which  we 
represent  those  material  groups  of  sense-impressions 
that  are  currently  spoken  of  as  physical  bodies  or 
objects.  To  find  the  simplest  possible  types  of  relative 
motion  for  these  various  concepts,  and  thence  to  con- 
struct the  motion  of  the  geometrical  forms  by  which 
we  symbolize  physical  bodies,  so  that  the  motion  de- 


THE  LAWS  OF   MOTION.  337 

scribes  to  any  required  degree  of  accuracy  our  routine 
of  sense-impressions,  is  the  scope  of  physical  science. 
We  find  that  by  assuming  certain  laws  for  the  relative 
motion  of  these  conceptual  symbols  —  the  laws  of 
motion  in  their  widest  sense  —  we  are  able  to  construct. 
a  world  of  geometrical  forms  moving  in  conceptual 
space  and  time,  which  describe  with  wonderful  exact- 
ness the  complex  phases  of  our  perceptual  experience. 

§  2.  —  The  Limits  to  Mechanism. 

Let  us  now  resume  the  elements  of  our  conceptual 
model  of  the  physical  universe  in  a  purely  diagram- 
matic manner.1  An  asterisk  shall  represent  the  ether- 


QD 
»* 


., 
*;.**     \,t 

**' 

ETHER-UNITS     PRIME  ATOM  CHEMICAL  ATOM        MOLECULE  (-;)      PARTJCLU-V)         BODY 

FIG.  21. 

element,  a  ring  of  asterisks  will  suggest  the  prime-atom 
probably  constructed  from  a  special  ether-element 
motion  —  for  example,  a  vortex-  ring.  One,  two,  or 
more-prime  atoms  form  the  chemical  atom,  and  for 
its  symbol  we  will  take  three  interlaced  rings.  Com- 
binations of  chemical  atoms  form  the  molecule,  in  our 
diagram  represented  by  two  chemical  atoms  of  three 
and  one  of  two  prime  atoms.  Millions  of  these  mole- 
cules, of  which  we  can  only  represent  a  few  by  the 
shorthand  symbol  /,  would  form  the  particle  (short- 
hand symbol  i/),  while  millions  of  particles,  here 

1  The  diagram  is  only  to  suggest  the  physical  relationships  to  the 
reader,  and  has  no  meaning  from  the  standpoint  of  relathe  size  or 
form. 

23 


338  THE  GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

merely  suggested,  conceptually  enclosed  by  a  con- 
tinuous surface,  symbolize  the  physical  bodies  of  our 
perceptual  experience.  These  concepts,  it  must  be 
borne  in  mind,  from  ether-element  to  particle,  have  no 
perceptual  equivalents,  and  it  is  only  by  experiments 
on  the  perceptual  equivalent  of  the  last  of  the  series, 
the  conceptual  body,  that  the  physicist  is  able  to 
test  the  truth  of  the  laws  of  motion  he  propounds. 

In  the  first  place  he  postulated  these  laws  for  par- 
ticles, and  demonstrated  their  validity  by  showing 
that  they  enabled  him  to  describe  the  routine  of  his 
sense-impressions  with  regard  to  physical  "  bodies." 
But  with  the  growth  of  our  ideas  as  to  the  nature  of 
ether  and  gross  "  matter,"  we  naturally  begin  to  question 
whether  the  laws  which  describe  the  relative  motion 
of  two  particles  are  to  be  conceived  as  holding  for 
two  molecules,  two  chemical  atoms,  two  prime-atoms, 
and  ultimately  for  two  ether-elements.  Or,  what  may 
possibly  be  still  more  important,  are  they  to  hold  for 
the  relative  motion  of  a  prime-atom  and  adjacent 
ether-elements  ?  How  far  are  we  to  consider  the  laws 
of  motion  as  applied  to  particles  of  gross  "  matter  "  to 
result  from  the  manner  in  which  particles  are  built  up 
from  molecules,  molecules  from  atoms,  and  ultimately 
atoms  probably  from  ether-elements  ?  Now  this  is  a 
very  important  issue,  and  one  which  does  not  appear 
to  have  always  been  sufficiently  regarded.  If  we 
assume  that  the  particle  is  ultimately  based  on  a 
certain  type  of  ether-motion,  then  we  must  admit  the 
existence  of  other  types  of  ether-motion  which  do  not 
constitute  gross  "  matter."  In  this  case  it  will  by  no 
means  follow  that  the  relative  motion  of  two  particles, 
or  of  two  prime-atoms,  will  follow  the  same  laws  as 
the  relative  motion  of  two  ether-elements.  It  is  quite 


THE  LAWS  OF   MOTION.  339 

clear,  of  course,  that  modes  of  motion  peculiar  to  gross 
"  matter  "  must  arise  from  its  special  structure,  and  not 
be  assumed  to  flow  from  laws  applying  to  all  moving 
things.  For  example,  gravitation,  magnetization, 
electrification,  the  absorption  and  emission  of  heat 
and  light  are  all  phases  of  sense-impression  which  we 
associate  with  gross  "  matter,"  and  therefore  they 
must  be  described  by  modes  of  motion  characteristic 
of  gross  "  matter,"  or  modes  which  flow  from  its 
peculiar  constitution.  As  kinetic  formulae  or  special 
laws  of  motion  they  cannot  be  extended  to  the  ether 
in  general.  But  there  are  still  more  general  laws  of 
motion,  which  we  may  describe  as  the  Newtonian 
laws,  and  which  certainly  when  applied  to  particles 
are  confirmed  by  our  perceptual  experience  of  bodies. 
Ought  we  to  assert  that  these  laws  hold  in  their 
entirety  for  all  the  scale  from  particle  to  ether- 
element  ?  Shall  we  find  our  conceptual  description 
of  the  universe  simplified,  or  the  reverse,  by  sup- 
posing complete  mechanism  to  extend  from  particle 
to  ether-element  ?  Or  will  it  be  more  advantageous 
to  postulate  that  mechanism  in  whole  or  part  flows 
from  the  ascending  complexity  of  our  structures, 
that  the  ether-element  is  largely  the  source  of 
mechanism,  but  is  not  completely  mechanical J  in 
the  sense  of  obeying  the  laws  of  motion  as  given  in 
dynamical  text-books  ?  The  question  is  undoubtedly 
an  important  one,  but  one  which  cannot  be  answered 
offhand.  Nor,  indeed,  till  we  have  much  clearer  con- 
ceptions of  the  structure  of  the  prime-atom  than  we 
have  at  present  reached,  will  it  be  possible  to  say  how 


1  For  example,  as  will  be  shown  in  the  sequel,  the  "mass  "of  a 
particle  must  be  considered  as  in  all  probability  very  different  from  the 
"  mass  "  of  an  ether-element  (p.  368). 


340  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

far  the  mechanism  we  postulate  of  particles  may  be 
conceived  to  flow  from  its  structure. 

In  order  to  remind  the  reader  that  the  general  laws  of 
motion  we  are  about  to  discuss  may  either  entirely  or 
only  in  part  hold  for  the  whole  series  of  physical  con- 
cepts from  particle  to  ether-element,  we  will  class  the 
whole  series  together  as  corpuscles^  a  word  simply  signi- 
fying little  elementary  bodies.  We  shall  then  have  to 
ask  in  each  case  to  which  of  the  ideal  corpuscles  we  are 
to  suppose  our  laws  to  apply.  The  test  will  always  be 
the  same,  namely  :  How  far  is  the  assumption  neces- 
sary in  order  to  obtain  a  model  which  will  enable  us 
to  describe  briefly  the  routine  of  perception  ? 

§  3. —  The  First  Law  of  Motion. 

Let  us  now  return  to  our  conception  of  the  universe 
as  the  regulated  dance  of  the  elemental  groups  which 
we  have  termed  prime-atoms,  chemical  atoms,  mole- 
cules, and  particles.  Individual  corpuscles  dance  in 
groups,  groups  dance  round  groups,  and  groups  of 
groups  dance  relatively  to  each  other.  How,  we  have 
next  to  ask,  do  two  corpuscles  dance  with  regard  to 
each  other  ?  In  the  first  place  we  must  observe  that, 
at  least  in  the  case  of  gross  "  matter ",  a  corpuscle 
which  is  conceived  as  forming  part  of  the  sun  must 
be  considered  as  regulating  its  dance  with  due 
regard  to  a  corpuscle  forming  part  of  the  earth. 
We  cannot  assert  that  it  would  not  be  best  to  con- 
ceive this  as  really  done  through  a  chain  of  part- 
ners, namely,  ether-elements  intervening  between  the 
sun  and  earth  corpuscles,  but  as  we  have  not  yet 
settled  how  this  chain  of  partners  is  to  act,  we  must 
content  ourselves  at  present  by  the  statement  that 
sun  and  earth  corpuscles  do  regard  each  other's 


THE  LAWS  OF   MOTION.  341 

presence.  But  if  they  can  do  this  at  90  million 
miles,  there  is  every  reason  for  inferring  no  breach 
in  continuity  and  supposing  they  would  also  do  it 
at  90  billion  miles.  We  note,  however,  at  once 
that  it  is  necessary  to  conceive  a  particle  at  the 
surface  of  the  earth  paying  more  attention  in  its 
dance  to  an  earth  particle  than  to  a  sun  particle,  and 
again  the  phenomenon  of  cohesion  tells  us  that  two 
adjacent  particles  of  the  same  piece  of  substance  pay 
more  heed  to  each  other  than  particles  of  different 
pieces.  Hence  we  conclude  that :  (i)  in  general 
terms  corpuscles  must  be  conceived  as  moving  with 
greater  regard  to  their  immediate  partners  in  the 
dance  than  to  their  near  neighbours,  and  with  greater 
regard  to  near  neighbours  than  to  still  more  distant 
corpuscles ;  but,  (2)  there  is  no  limit  to  the  distance 
at  which  we  conceive  corpuscles  can  influence  each 
other's  motion.  This  influence  may,  however,  be  so 
small  that  even  when  summed  for  the  bodies  that 
we  construct  from  corpuscles,  there  is  no  perceptual 
equivalent  to  be  found  for  it  by  aid  of  any  instrument 
at  our  disposal.  We  can  now  state  a  first  general 
law  of  motion  :— 

Every  corpuscle  in  the  conceptual  model  of  the 
universe  must  be  conceived  as  moving  with  due  regard 
to  the  presence  of  every  other  corpuscle,  although  for 
very  distant  corpuscles  the  regard  paid  is  extremely 
small  as  compared  with  that  paid  to  immediate  neigh- 
bours. 

If  the  reader  once  grasps  that  every  corpuscle  in 
the  universe  must  be  conceived  as  influencing  the 
motion  of  every  other  corpuscle,  he  will  then  fully 
appreciate  the  complexity  of  the  corpuscular  dance  by 
aid  of  which  we  symbolize  the  world  of  sense-impres- 


342  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

sions.  The  law  of  motion  just  stated  probably  applies 
to  prime-atoms,  and  through  them  to  chemical  atoms, 
molecules,  and  particles.  Possibly  it  does  not  apply 
to  distant  ether-elements  directly,  but  these,  perhaps, 
influence  each  other's  motion  only  indirectly  by 
directly  influencing  the  motion  of  their  immediate 
neighbours.  In  this  case  the  "  action  at  a  distance  " 
generally  asserted  of  corpuscles  of  gross  "  matter," 
may  very  probably  be  conceived  as  due  to  the  action 
between  adjacent  ether-elements.  We  should  then 
have  to  state  the  first  law  as  follows  :  — 

Every  corpuscle,  whether  of  ether  or  gross  "  matter" 
influences  the  motion  of  the  adjacent  ether  corpuscles, 
and  through  them  of  every  other  corpuscle,  however  dis- 
tant ;  the  influence  thus  spread  is  nevertheless  very 
insignificant  at  great  as  compared  with  small  distances. 

§  4.  —  The  Second  Law  of  Motion,  or  the  Principle  of  Inertia. 
Now,  in  constructing  the  universe  conceptually  from 
our  corpuscles,  it  is  impossible  to  take  into  account 
the  influence  of  all  the  corpuscles  upon  each  other  at 
one  and  the  same  time.  Accordingly  we  neglect  at 
once  influences  which  even  in  the  aggregate  are  beyond 
our  powers  of  measurement.  Further,  we  purposely 
exclude  from  consideration  slight,  if  measurable, 
variations  of  motion  due  to  more  distant  groups.  We 
isolate  a  particular  group  of  corpuscles,  and  this  group 
which  we  deal  with  conceptually  apart  from  the  rest 
we  term,  for  the  purposes  of  some  particular  discussion, 


The  most  limited  field  that  we  can  conceive  is  that  of 
a  single  corpuscle.  If  we  could  isolate  such  a  corpuscle 
from  the  rest  of  the  conceptual  universe,  how  would  it 
move  ?  At  first  sight  the  question  is  absurd,  because 


THE  LAWS   OF   MOTION.  343 

in  Chapter  VI.  (p.  247)  we  saw  that  motion  is  mean- 
ingless if  it  be  not  relative  to  something.  The 
moment,  however,  we  introduce  a  second  corpuscle 
into  the  field  in  order  to  measure  the  motion  of  the 
first,  they  begin  to  pay  regard  to  each  other's  presence, 
and  we  are  no  longer  dealing  with  the  motion  of  an 
isolated  corpuscle.  But  we  have  seen  that  the  greater 
the  distance  between  the  corpuscles,  the  less  this  influ- 
ence must  be  conceived  to  be ;  hence  we  may  take 
the  conceptual  limit  by  supposing  that  the  corpuscles 
are  so  far  off  that  their  mutual  influence  is  negligible, 
while  their  mutual  presence  will  still  suffice  to  mark  a 
relative  motion.1  Now  in  order  that  the  laws  which 
govern  the  motion  of  corpuscles  shall  lead  to  the  con- 
struction of  complex  motions,  fully  describing  the 
phases  of  our  perceptual  experience,  we  are  compelled 
to  suppose  that  the  more  and  more  completely  we 
separate  one  corpuscle  from  the  influence  of  a  second 
corpuscle,  the  more  and  more  nearly  does  its  motion 
relative  to  the  second  corpuscle  cease  to  vary.  The 
first  corpuscle  either  remains  at  rest  relatively  to  the 
second  or  continues  to  move  with  the  same  speed 
— the  same  number  of  miles  per  minute — in  the 
same  direction.  But  this  is  what  we  term  uniform 
motion,  or  motion  without  acceleration  (pp.  276-7), 
and  we  are  thus  endowing  our  corpuscles  with  a  very 
important  property,  namely,  we  assert  that  they  will 
not  dance,  that  is,  alter  their  motion,  unless  they  have 
partners  to  dance  with.  This  characteristic  of  cor- 

1  The  reader  must  remember  that  relative  position  is  conceptualized 
by  a  directed  step  and  that  it  is  a  series  of  directed  steps  which  form  the 
path  of  the  relative  motion  (p.  250).  Each  directed  step  is  to  be  con- 
ceived as  "  fixed  "  in  direction,  *.<?.,  its  points  are  to  be  considered  as 
having  no  accelerations  relative  to  each  other.  See  Appendix,  Note  /. 


344  TI*E  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

puscles,  that  they  do  not  alter  their  uniform  motion 
except  in  the  presence  of  other  corpuscles,  is  scien- 
tifically termed  their  inertia. 

With  regard  to  this  law  of  inertia  it  must  probably 
be  conceived  as  holding  from  the  prime-atom  to  the 
particle,  but  a  difficulty  comes  in  when  we  consider 
ether-elements.  If  the  prime-atom  be  a  particular 
type  of  ether-motion,  for  example  an  ether  vortex- 
ring  or  ether-squirt,  then  the  very  existence  of  the 
corpuscles  of  gross  "  matter  "  depends  upon  the  pre- 
sence of  the  ether-elements,  not  only  in  their  own 
constitution  but  in  their  immediate  neighbourhood. 
It  becomes,  therefore,  hopelessly  absurd  to  consider 
what  a  corpuscle  of  gross  "matter"  would  do  if  it 
were  isolated  from  the  influence  of  ether-elements. 
The  law  of  inertia  for  gross  "  matter  "  must  then  flow 
from  the  peculiar  structure  of  gross  "  matter."  The 
mutual  presence  of  ether-elements  and  of  an  isolated 
prime-atom  will  then  be  seen  to  involve  the  inertia 
of  the  latter,  but  the  ether-elements  themselves  will, 
while  the  prime-atom  moves  uniformly,  be  varying 
their  motion  with  due  regard  to  the  presence  of  the 
prime-atom.1  What  the  law  of  inertia  is  to  be  con- 
sidered as  meaning  when  applied  to  isolated  ether- 
elements,  it  is  again  difficult  to  say.  Possibly  it  is  idle 
to  inquire  so  long,  at  any  rate,  as  the  conceptual  ether 
remains  as  little  defined  as  at  present.  Our  notions 
of  the  ether  are  so  essentially  bound  up  with  the  con- 
ception of  its  continuity,  while  our  notions  of  gross- 


1  For  example,  it  may  be  shown  that  an  isolated  vortex-ring  in  an 
infinite  fluid  moves  without  sensible  change  of  size  with  uniform  velocity 
perpendicular  to  its  plane  ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  ether-elements  vary 
their  velocity  according  to  their  position  relative  to  the  ring  (See  A.  B. 
Basset,  A  Treatise  on  Hydrodynamics,  vol.  ii.  pp.  59-62). 


THE  LAWS  OF  MOTION.  345 

"  matter  "  are,  on  the  other  hand,  so  closely  associated 
with  the  idea  of  the  discontinuity  of  matter,  that  we 
are  inclined  to  treat  as  fundamental  for  ether-elements 
the  method  in  which  they  act  in  each  other's  presence, 
and  for  gross  "  matter "  corpuscles  the  method  in 
which  they  act  when  isolated.  On  this  account  the 
law  of  inertia,  as  we  postulate  it  for  gross  "  matter " 
corpuscles,  may  be  considered  as  a  feature  of 
mechanism  very  probably  flowing  from  the  structure 
of  the  prime-atom  itself. 

§  5. —  The  Third  Law  of  Motion.    Acceleration  is  determined 
by  Position. 

Let  us  now  proceed  a  stage  further  and  postulate 
the  next  simplest  field  ;  let  us  suppose  two  corpuscles 
taken  and  their  motions  determined  relatively  (p.  250) 
to  a  third  corpuscle  which,  however,  like  that  on 
P-  343  we  wiU  consider  to  be  at  such  a  distance  as  to 
be  quite  isolated  from  their  influence.  What  must 
we  conceive  as  happening?  In  the  first  place, 
because  two  corpuscles  are  in  the  same  field  must 
we  consider  them  as  having  a  certain  definite  posi- 
tion relative  to  each  other  ?  Certainly  not.  We 
find  ourselves  compelled  to  consider  them  as  capable 
of  taking  up  a  great  variety  of  positions  with  regard 
to  each  other.  Does,  then,  the  fact  that  they  are 
in  the  same  field,  or  in  a  certain  relative  position 
in  that  field,  determine  with  what  velocities  we 
are  to  consider  them  as  moving?  Again  we  must 
answer :  No — at  any  rate  for  particles.  In  order  to 
construct  motions  which  will  effectively  describe  our 
sequences  of  sense-impression  we  are  forced  to  sup- 
pose that  particles  may  move  through  the  same 
relative  position  with  every  variety  of  velocity.  What, 
then,  must  we  consider  as  determined  when  we  know 


THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 


the  relative  position  of  two  corpuscles  ?  It  is  their 
accelerations,  the  rates  at  which  they  are  changing 
their  relative  position.  Two  corpuscles  may  be  moving 
through  the  same  position  with  any  velocities,  but  they 
will  spurt  and  shunt  each  other's  motions  in  a  perfectly 
definite  manner,  depending  on  their  relative  position. 

If  A  and  B  represent  two  corpuscles  moving 
(relative  to  the  isolated  third  corpuscle)  in  the 
directions  AT  and  BT'  with  the  velocities  V  and  V 
given  by  the  steps  OQ  and  O'Q'  of  their  respective 
hodographs  (p.  263),  then  the  spurt  and  shunt  of  V 
and  V,  or,  as  we  have  seen  (p.  265),  the  velocities  of 
Q  and  Q'  along  their  hodograph  paths  will  be  deter- 


FlG.    22. 

mined  at  each  instant  by  the  relative  position  of  A 
and  B.  Let  these  velocities  of  Q  and  Q',  or  the 
accelerations  of  A  and  B  be  represented  by  the  steps 
Q^  and  QV  taken  along  the  tangents  at  Q  and  Q' 
(pp.  259  and  265).  Then  the  question  naturally  arises, 
How  are  we  to  consider  the  spurts  and  shunts  given  by 
Q/  and  QV  (p.  268)  to  depend  on  the  relative  position 
of  A  and  B?  In  the  first  place  we  conceive  Qt  and 
Q't'  to  be  parallel,  but  in  opposite  senses  (p.  248).  We 
find  it  needful  to  suj  po  ;e  universally  that  the  mutual 
accelerations  of  corpuscles  have  the  same  direction 
but  opposite  senses.1  In  the  next  place  it  is  usually 

1  That  is,  if  A  spurts  B  in  the  direction  from  B  toward  A,  then  B  will 
spurt  A  in  the  direction  from  A  to  B  and  vice  versfr. 


THE   LAWS  OF   MOTION.  347 

assumed  that  this  direction  is  that  of  the  line  joining 
the  points  which  represent  the  corpuscles  A  and  B. 
Now  this  assumption  is  possibly  correct  enough z  when 
we  are  dealing  with  particles  of  gross  "  matter,"  at 
any  rate  when  we  are  discussing  the  motion  of  non- 
adjacent  particles,  or  those  for  which  we  are  not 
compelled  to  consider  the  distance  AB  vanishingly 
small  like  the  dimensions  of  the  particles  themselves.2 
On  the  other  hand  there  appear  to  be  many  physical 
and  even  chemical  phenomena  which  cannot  be 
described  by  replacing  the  motion  of  a  prime-atom, 
chemical  atom,  or  molecule  by  the  motion  of  a  point. 
In  this  case  the  line  joining  the  two  corpuscles  be- 
comes a  meaningless  term,  and  we  have  really  to  deal 
with  the  relative  motion  of  groups  of  elements,  con- 
structed very  probably  from  the  motion  of  simple 
ether-elements. 

When,  however,  we  ask  of  ether-elements  whether 
we  are  to  consider  them  as  mutually  accelerating  each 
other  in  the  line  joining  them,  we  are  at  once  stopped 
by  the  difficulty  that  we  have  reason  for  supposing 
non-adjacent  ether-elements  do  not  influence  each 
other's  motion  at  all  (p.  342).  But  if  we  turn  to  ad- 
jacent ether-elements,  the  line  joining  them  vanishes 
with  the  dimensions  of  the  elements  when  we  try  to 
conceive  the  ether  as  absolutely  continuous  (pp.  2 1 3, 324 
and  344).  Discontinuity  of  the  ether  may  carry  us  over 

1  See  Appendix,  Note  II. 

2  It  will  be  noticed  in  this  case  that  if  we  take  the  motion  of  A 
relative  to  B,  the  ray  and  tangent  to  the  path  or  orbit  of  A  are  re- 
spectively parallel  to  the  tangent  and  ray  to  the  hodograph  or  path  of 
Q.     This  is  expressed  in  technical  language  by  saying  that  the  orbit  of 
such  a  motion  is  a  link-polygon  (funicular  polygon)  for  the  hodograph 
as  a  vector-polygon  (force-polygon),  and  it  forms  the  basis  of  a  powerful 
graphical  method  of  dealing  with  central  accelerations. 


348  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

this  difficulty  and  allow  us  to  consider  ether-elements 
as  mutually  accelerating  each  other's  motion  in  the 
direction  of  the  line  joining  them,  but  such  discon- 
tinuity reintroduces  one  of  the  problems  which  the  con- 
ception of  the  ether  was  invented  to  solve  (pp.  213  and 
328).  We  may  be  quite  safe  in  postulating  that  when  an 
ideal  geometrical  surface  is  supposed  drawn  and  fixed 
in  the  ether  its  points  will  have  a  motion  relative  to 
each  other  upon  its  form  being  changed  ;  the  points 
of  the  surface  will  tend  to  return  to  their  original  posi- 
tions with  accelerations  depending  on  their  change  of 
relative  position.  But  when  we  assert  that  this  is  due 
to  ether-elements  mutually  accelerating  each  other's 
motion  in  the  line  joining  them,  we  may,  after  all,  be 
postulating  a  phase  of  mechanism  for  the  ether 
which  is  only  true  for  gross  "  matter,"  and  which  may 
indeed  flow  from  the  particular  type  of  ether-motion 
which  constitutes  gross  "  matter."  If  the  prime-atom 
be  a  vortex-ring  it  would  be  impossible  to  describe 
in  general  the  action  between  two  prime-atoms  as  a 
"  mutual  acceleration  in  the  line  joining  them."  On 
the  other  hand,  if  the  prime-atom  be  an  ether-squirt, 
this  phrase  would  effectively  describe  the  action  be- 
tween two  prime-atoms.  In  both  cases  the  statement 
that  particles  mutually  accelerate  each  other's  motion 
in  the  line  joining  them  would  flow  either  as  an  abso- 
lute or  an  approximate  law  from  the  particular  structure 
of  gross  "  matter,"  and  would  not  be  a  mechanical  truth 
for  all  corpuscles  from  ether-element  up  to  particle. 

There  are  still  several  points  to  be  noticed  with 
regard  to  the  nature  of  the  manner  in  which  corpuscles 
spurt  and  shunt  each  other's  motion.  We  have  said 
that  this  depends  on  the  relative  position  of  the  cor- 
puscles— but  is  the  mutual  acceleration  never  influenced 


THE   LAWS  OF   MOTION.  349 

by  the  velocities  of  the  corpuscles  ?  Do  two  of  our 
conceptual  dancers  influence  each  other  solely  by 
their  relative  position  and  never  by  the  speed  and 
direction  with  which  they  pass  through  that  position  ? 
It  has  been  supposed  that  the  introduction  of  the 
relative  velocity  as  a  factor  determining  the  mutual 
acceleration  of  two  particles  would  be  contrary  to  a 
well-established  physical  principle  termed  the  conser- 
vation of  energy.  It  is  indeed  a  fact  that  many 
writers,  from  Helmholtz  downwards,  have  given  a 
mathematical  proof  of  the  conservation  of  energy 
which  depends  on  mutual  acceleration  being  a  function 
of  relative  position  and  not  of  relative  velocity.  But  if 
two  moving  bodies  be  placed  in  a  fluid  they  will 
apparently  accelerate  each  other  with  accelerations 
depending  upon  their  velocities  as  well  as  on  their 
relative  position.  The  conservation  of  energy  still 
holds  in  this  case  for  the  entire  system  of  fluid  and 
moving  bodies,  and  yet  to  the  observer  unconscious 
of  the  fluid  the  mutual  accelerations  of  the  bodies 
would  certainly  appear  to  be  determined  by  their 
velocities  as  well  as  by  their  position.1  Something 
of  this  kind  may  well  occur  when  we  regard  the 
action  between  corpuscles  of  gross  "  matter  "  without 
regard  to  the  ether  in  which  we  conceive  them  floating. 
We  cannot  assume  that  the  mutual  accelerations  of 
prime-atoms,  chemical  atoms,  and  molecules  depends 
solely  on  their  relative  positions  ;  it  may  depend  also 
on  their  velocities  relative  to  each  other  or  relative  to 
the  ether  in  which  we  suppose  them  to  be  moving. 

1  The  ether  being  neglected,  its  unregarded  kinetic  energy  appears  as 
potential  energy  of  the  moving  bodies,  and  is  generally  expressible  in 
terms  of  the  velocities  of  those  bodies.  Hence  those  bodies  appear  to 
have  a  mutual  acceleration  depending  not  only  on  their  relative  position 
but  on  their  velocities, 


350  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

This  remark  is  of  special  importance  when  we  try  to 
describe  electric  and  magnetic  phenomena  by  the 
mutual  accelerations  of  particles  at  a  distance. 

It  is  usually  assumed  by  physicists,  however,  that 
the  action  between  particles  at  a  distance  is  to  be  con- 
sidered as  taking  place  in  the  line  joining  them  and  as 
depending  only  on  relative  position.  There  have  not 
indeed  been  wanting  scientific  writers  who  have 
asserted  that  the  whole  universe  could  be  described 
mechanically  by  aid  of  a  system  of  particles  or  points, 
the  mutual  accelerations  of  which  depended  solely  on 
their  mutual  distances.  But  simple  as  such  an  hypo- 
thesis would  be,  its  propounders  have  hitherto  failed 
to  demonstrate  its  sufficiency.1  Nevertheless  it  has 
played  a  great  part  in  physical  research,  and  its  influ- 
ence may  still  be  seen  in  much  that  is  written  at  the 
present  time  about  the  laws  of  motion  and  the  con- 
servation of  energy. 

The  above  discussion  puts  us  in  a  better  position 
for  appreciating  the  statements  that  we  may  legiti- 
mately make  with  regard  to  the  dance  not  only  of 
two  but  of  any  number  of  corpuscles.  In  general  we 
may  assert  that  whether  we  are  dealing  with  the  con- 
tinuous ether  or  with  discontinuous  atoms  and  mole- 
cules, then  if  we  fix  our  attention  on  a  geometrical 
point  which  symbolizes  an  element  of  ether,  atom,  or 

1  The  impulse  to  this  mode  of  describing  the  physical  universe  cer- 
tainly arose  from  the  Newtonian  law  of  gravitation.  It  was  perhaps 
pushed  as  far  as  it  could  possibly  be  of  service  in  the  writings  of  Poisson, 
Cauchy,  and  the  great  French  analysts  at  the  beginning  of  the  century. 
Traces  of  its  persistency  may  be  still  found  in  modern  writers;  for 
example  we  may  cite  Clausius — one  of  the  most  distinguished  of  modern 
German  physicists — who  considered  that  all  the  phenomena  of  nature  can 
probably  be  reduced  to  points  mutually  accelerating  each  other  in  the 
lines  joining  them  with  accelerations  which  are  functions  only  of  their 
mutual  distances  (Die  mechanische  Wcirmetheorie,  Bd.  i.  S.  17). 


THE  LAWS  OF  MOTION.  351 

molecule,  the  acceleration  (not  the  velocity)  of  this 
point  will  depend  on  the  position  of  this  point  or 
element  relative  to  other  points  or  elements  (and 
possibly  in  certain  cases  on  its  velocities  relative  to 
those  points  or  elements).  For  particles  of  gross 
"  matter,"  on  the  other  hand,  we  find  it  as  a  general 
(if  not  invariable)  rule  sufficient  to  assert  that  the 
mode  in  which  their  velocity  is  being  spurted  and 
shunted  depends  solely  on  their  position  relative  to 
other  particles.  In  particular,  if  two  particles  be  alone 
in  the  field,  their  mutual  accelerations  will  depend  on 
their  relative  position  and  may  be  conceived  as  taking 
place  in  the  line  joining  them,  but  in  opposite  senses. 

§  6. —  Velocity  as  an  Epitome  of  Past  History.     Mechanism 
and  Materialism. 

There  are  one  or  two  points  in  these  statements 
which  deserve  special  notice.  If  we  avoid  the  metaphy- 
sical idea  of  force,  and  consider  causation  as  pure  ante- 
cedence in  phenomena  (pp.  155-6),  then  the  cause  of 
change  of  motion  or  acceleration  must  in  our  con- 
ceptual model  of  the  phenomenal  world  be  associated 
with  relative  position.  The  given  velocities  of  a  system 
at  any  time  may  be  looked  upon  as  the  sum  of  the 
past  changes  of  motion  ;  or  the  causes  of  a  given 
motion  can  only  be  conceived  as  lying  in  the  totality 
of  all  past  relative  positions  of  the  system.  Thus  force, 
as  the  conceptual  idea  of  moving  cause,  could  only 
be  defined  as  the  history  of  the  relative  positions  of  a 
system.  This  history  determines  the  actual  velocities 
of  the  parts  of  the  system,  while  actual  position  deter- 
mines how  the  velocities  are  actually  changing.  The 
"  actual  position,"  however,  is  the  conceptual  equiva- 
lent of  the  mode  in  which  we  perceptually  distinguish 


THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

coexisting  sense-impressions,  while  "past  history"  is 
the  conceptual  equivalent  of  the  perceptual  sequence 
in  sense-impressions.  "  Actual  position  "  and  "  past 
history  "  taken  in  conjunction  thus  symbolize  what 
we  have  termed  the  routine  of  perceptions  (p.  122). 
We  conclude,  therefore,  that  if  with  Professor  Tait 
and  other  metaphysical  physicists  we  even  project  our 
conceptions  into  the  perceptual  sphere,  we  still  shall 
not  find  in  "  force,"  as  either  the  cause  of  motion,  or 
the  cause  of  change  in  motion,  anything  more  than 
that  routine  of  perceptions  which  we  have  already 
seen  is  the  basis  of  the  scientific  definition  of  causa- 
tion (p.  153). 

The  idea  that  the  past  history  of  a  corpuscle  is 
resumed  in  its  present  velocity  is  an  important  one. 
If  we  knew  the  actual  velocities  of  all  existing  cor- 
puscles and  how  their  accelerations  depend  on  relative 
position  (or  it  may  be  also  on  relative  velocity),  then 
theoretically ',  by  aid  of  the  process  indicated  on  our 
p.  278,  or  by  an  extension  of  this  process,  we  should 
be  able  to  trace  out  the  whole  of  the  past,  or,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  whole  of  the  future  history  of  our 
conceptual  model  of  the  universe.  The  data  would 
be  sufficient  to  theoretically  solve  these  problems, 
although  our  brains  would  be  quite  insufficient  to 
manipulate  the  necessary  analysis.  Portions  of  it 
they  do,  however,  manage.  From  the  present  veloci- 
ties of  earth  and  moon  and  their  known  accelera- 
tions relative  to  the  sun  and  to  each  other,  we 
calculate  the  eclipses  of  two  or  three  thousand 
years  ago,  and  rectify  our  chronology  by  determining 
the  dates  of  eclipses  which  are  recorded  in  the 
history  of  past  human  experience.  Or,  again,  from 
thermal  or  tidal  data  we  describe  the  condition  of 


THE  LAWS  OF  MOTION.  353 

the  universe  as  we  conceive  it  to  have  been  millions 
of  years  back,  or  as  we  conceive  it  will  be  millions  of 
years  hence.  In  all  such  cases  we  consider  that 
because  our  conceptual  model  describes  very  accu- 
rately our  limited  perceptual  experience  of  past  and 
present,  it  will  continue  to  do  so  if  we  apply  it  to 
describe  sequences  which  cannot  be  verified  as  im- 
mediate sense-impressions.  In  this  case  we  are 
clearly  making  inferences,  but  inferences  which  are 
logically  justifiable  (pp.  72  and  420)  ;  we  assume  that 
because  our  conceptual  model  describes  very  accur- 
ately our  immediate  perceptual  experience,  it  would 
also  describe  the  antecedents  and  consequents  of  that 
experience,  did  they  exist  perceptually  ;  it  is  logical 
to  infer  when  we  see  the  panorama  of  a  river,  one 
portion  of  which  accurately  depicts  all  we  know  of 
the  River  Thames,  that  the  rest  of  the  panorama 
depicts  parts  of  the  same  river,  with  which  we  are 
unacquainted.  In  the  necessarily  limited  verifiable 
correspondence  of  our  perceptual  experience  with  our 
conceptual  model  lies  the  basis  of  our  mechanical 
description  of  the  universe.  As  a  shorthand  resume 
of  our  perceptual  experience,  and  as  a  co-ordination 
of  that  experience  with  stored  sense-impresses,  the 
only  objective  element  of  this  mechanical  theory  is 
seen  to  lie  in  the  similar  perceptive  and  reasoning 
faculties  of  two  human  minds.  Thus  the  sole  support 
of  that  materialism  which,  "  proceeding  from  the  fixed 
relation  between  matter  and  force  as  an  indestructible 
basis,"  finds  "mechanical  laws  inherent  in  the  things 
themselves,"  collapses  under  the  slightest  pressure  of 
logical  criticism.1 

1  The  chief  German  representatives  of  this  materialism  are  J.  Mole- 
schott  and  L.  Biichner,  and  it  has  found  its  warmest  supporters  in  Eng- 

24 


354  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

§  7. —  The  Fourth  Law  of  Motion. 

It  is  needful,  however,  that  we  should  return  to  our 
discussion  on  the  laws  of  motion,  and,  assuming  for 
the  present  that  relative  position  is  the  principal 
factor  in  the  determination  of  mutual  accelerations, 
we  must  ask  what  more  exact  laws  may  be  postulated 
with  regard  to  these  accelerations.  We  have  in  the 
first  place  to  investigate  how  far  the  individuality  of 
the  dancers  is  to  be  conceived  as  influencing  the 
manner  in  which  they  spurt  each  other's  motion.  Do 
any  two  dancers,  whatever  their  race  and  family,  and 
under  whatever  surroundings  they  may  meet,  always 
dance  in  the  same  fashion  whenever  they  come  to  the 
same  position  ?  Or  must  we  consider  it  necessary  to 
classify  our  corpuscles  by  some  scale  which  may  itself 
indeed  change  with  a  change  in  the  field  ?  Again, 
are  two  dancers  to  be  conceived  as  dancing  in  the 
same  manner  whatever  aspect  (p.  240)  they  bear  to 
each  other,  whether  they  come  to  the  same  position 
face  to  face,  or  back  to  back,  as  it  were  ?  Lastly,  if 
we  know  how  A  and  B  influence  each  other's  motions 
when  they  are  alone  in  the  field,  and  how  A  and  C 
dance  when  alone  together,  shall  we  be  able  to  tell 
how  A  will  act  in  the  presence  of  both  B  and  C  ? 
Here  are  a  number  of  ideas  which  we  must  try  and 
express  in  scientific  language  with  the  view  of  deter- 
mining what  answers  are  to  be  given  to  the  problems 
they  suggest. 

In  the  first  place  we  ask  the  question: — 

land  among  the  followers  of  the  late  Mr.  Bradlaugh.  It  is  perhaps 
needless  to  add  that  the  gifted  lady,  who  speaks  of  secularists  as  holding 
the  "  creed  of  Clifford  and  Charles  Bradlaugh,"  has  failed  to  see  the 
irreconcilable  divergence  between  the  inventor  of  "mind-stuff"  and 
the  follower  of  Biichner, 


THE   LAWS   OF   MOTION.  355 

Is  there  any  relation  between  the  mutual  accelera- 
tions of  two  corpuscles  A  and  B,  which  is  indepen- 
dent (i)  of  their  relative  position,  and  (2)  of  their 
possible  companions  in  the  field  ?  Is  there  any  rela- 
tion, in  fact,  which  depends  on  the  individualities  of 
the  corpuscles  A  and  B  ? 

This  problem  may  be  termed  that  of  the  Kinetic 
Scale*  Let  us  see  how  we  might  solve  this  problem 
ideally.  We  might  take  two  corpuscles  and  put  them 
at  different  distances  in  a  field  in  which  they  alone 
exerted  influence,  and  we  might  measure  their  mutual 
accelerations.  Then  we  might  repeat  this  process  with 
other  corpuscles  in  the  field,2  and  vary  the  field  itself 
in  every  possible  manner.  We  should  thus  obtain 
two  series  of  numbers,  the  one  series  representing 
the  acceleration  of  A  due  to  B,3  and  the  other  the 
acceleration  of  B  due  to  A.  In  the  sphere  of  con- 
ception we  should  then  be  applying  the  scientific 
method  of  classifying  facts  and  trying  by  careful 
examination  of  these  facts  to  discover  a  law  or 
formula  by  aid  of  which  they  might  be  described. 
And  we  should  very  soon  find  a  fundamental  relation 
between  these  mutual  accelerations  of  A  and  B. 
Returning  to  our  Fig.  22,  we  should  discover  that  the 
number  of  units  of  length  in  Qt  (if  this  represents 

1  Kinetic  is  an  adjective  formed  from  Greek  Kivrjmc,  a  dance,  a 
movement ;  the  kinetic  scale  signifies  a  scale  of  movement. 

3  The  manner  in  which  the  part  of  A's  acceleration  due  to  B  might 
be  separated  from  that  due  to  the  other  corpuscles  in  the  same  field 
cannot  be  fully  discussed  in  this  work.  In  many  cases  it  could  be 
discriminated  by  aid  of  the  parallelogram  of  accelerations  (p.  282). 

3  By  the  expression  "acceleration  of  A  due  to  B,"  frequently  used 
in  this  chapter,  the  reader  is  not  to  understand  that  B  enforces 
A's  change  in  motion.  The  term  is  solely  used  as  shorthand  for  the 
conceptual  idea  that  A  and  B,  when  in  each  other's  presence,  are  to 
be  considered  as  changing  their  relative  motions  in  a  certain  manner. 


356  THE   GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

the  acceleration  of  A  due  to  B)  was  always  in  a  con- 
stant ratio  to  the  number  of  units  of  length  in  QV' 
(or  the  acceleration  of  B  due  to  A).  If  O^  were  7 
units  and  Q't'  3  units,  then  whatever  other  corpuscles 
were  brought  into  the  field,  or  however  the  relative 
position  of  A  and  B  might  be  altered,  still  Qt  and  QY, 
be  they  both  large  or  both  small,  would  always  have 
the  ratio  of  7  to  3.  Now  here  is  the  beginning  of  the 
answer  to  our  first  question,  and  we  may  state  our 
immediate  conclusion  in  the  following  words  : — 

The  ratio  of  the  acceleration  of  A  due  to  B  to  the 
acceleration  of  B  due  to  A  must  akvqys  be  considered 
to  be  the  same  whatever  be  the  position  of  A  and  B, 
and  whatever  be  the  surrounding  field. 

The  ratio  of  mutual  accelerations  is  thus  seen  to 
depend  on  the  individual  pair  of  dancers,  and  not  on 
their  relative  position,  or  the  presence  and  character 
of  their  neighbours. 

But  the  reader  may  ask:  How  can  science  possibly 
have  drawn  such  a  wide-reaching  conclusion  as  this, 
since  even  the  most  metaphysical  of  physicists  has 
never  caught  one  corpuscle,  let  alone  two,  and  could 
not  therefore  have  experimented  upon  them  in  every 
possible  field.  The  answer  is  of  the  same  character 
as  that  to  the  problem  of  the  gravitating  particles 
(p.  336).  Physicists  have  experimented  on  perceptual 
bodies  in  all  sorts  of  fields  ;  they  have  electrified, 
magnetized,  warmed,  or  mechanically  united  by 
strings  or  rods  bodies  of  finite  dimensions ;  but, 
whatever  the  nature  of  the  field,  they  have  found 
that  the  smaller  the  bodies — the  more  nearly  they 
approached  the  conceptual  limit  of  particle, — the  more 
nearly  they  have  been  able  to  describe  the  sequence  of 
their  sense-impressions  by  aid  of  conceptual  particles 


THE   LAWS   OF   MOTION. 

obeying  the  above  law.  They  then  postulated  the 
above  law  as  true  for  particles,  and,  inverting  the  pro- 
cess, proceeded  by  aid  of  this  law  to  describe  the  motion 
of  those  aggregates  of  particles  which  are  our  symbols 
for  perceptual  bodies.  The  validity  of  the  law  was 
then  demonstrated  by  the  power  it  was  found  to  give 
us  of  predicting  the  future  routine  of  our  sense-im- 
pressions with  regard  to  perceptual  bodies.  Once 
established  as  a  mechanical  principle  for  particles,  it. 
was  natural  to  investigate  whether  its  application  to 
the  whole  range  of  corpuscles  would  give  results  in 
agreement  with  our  perceptual  experience.  In  so  far 
as  it  did  so,  it  became  recognized  as  a  universal  law 
of  mechanism.  This  process  of  discovering  and  then 
justifying  the  conceptual  law  by  aid  of  our  perceptual 
experience  applies  to  all  our  further  statements  with 
regard  to  the  laws  of  motion,  and  I  shall  not  think  it 
necessary  for  my  present  purposes  to  refer  in  each 
individual  case  to  the  experimental  discovery  and 
justification. 

§  8.  —  The  Scientific  Conception  of  Mass. 

This  fourth  law  of  motion  carries  us  a  long  way  in 
our  description  of  the  dance  of  corpuscles,  but  I  have 
now  to  ask  the  reader  to  follow  me  in  a  rather  more 
difficult  investigation.  This  will,  however,  eventually 
repay  us  by  the  number  of  new  ideas  to  which  it  intro- 
duces us.  As  the  fourth  law  stands  at  present  we  should 
have  to  make  experiments  on  every  possible  pair  of  cor- 
puscles in  order  to  form  a  scale  of  the  ratios  of  their 
mutual  accelerations.  In  order  to  avoid  this  very 
laborious  process  we  conceive  a  standard  corpuscle 
taken,  which  we  will  represent  by  the  letter  Q,  and 
we  suppose  a  record  formed  of  the  ratio  of  the  mutual 


358  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE^ 

accelerations  of  Q  and  of  each  of  the  other  corpuscles 
with  which  we  populate  conceptual  space. 

By  the  third  law  of  motion  the  acceleration  of  Q 
due  to  A  will  always  be  in  the  same  ratio  to  the 
acceleration  of  A  due  to  Q,  whatever  be  the  field. 
Now  we  are  going  to  give  a  name  to  this  ratio ;  we 
shall  call  it  the  mass  of  A  relative  to  the  standard 
Q,  or  more  simply  the  mass  of  A.  Thus  we  have  : — 

,,         ...        Acceleration  of  Q  due  to  A  /  \ 

MassofA=-A  — 7-r-z ^     •     •     (a)- 

Acceleration  of  A  due  to  Q 

And  similarly,  if  B  be  a  second  corpuscle,  we  have  : — 

Acceleration  of  Q  due  to  B  ,^ 

MassofB  =  Acceleration  of  B  due  to  Q     '     '     (/3)> 

This  definition  leads  us  to  two  important  points. 
We  see,  namely,  that  the  mass  of  a  corpuscle  has 
relation  to  some  standard  corpuscle,  or  mass  is  always 
a  relative  quantity  ;  and,  further,  mass  is  a  mere 
number  representing  a  ratio  of  accelerations.  We  have 
here,  then,  a  perfectly  clear  and  intelligible  definition  ; 
we  can  grasp  what  velocity  means,  and  we  can  under- 
stand how  its  change  is  measured  by  acceleration. 
Mass,  accordingly,  as  the  ratio  of  the  numbers  of 
units  in  two  accelerations,  is  a  conception  which  can 
easily  be  appreciated.  It  is  in  this  manner  that  mass 
is  invariably  determined  scientifically,  yet  neverthe- 
less the  reader  will  frequently  find  mass  defined  in 
text-books  of  physics  as  "  the  quantity  of  matter  in  a 
body."  After  our  discussion  of  matter  in  Chapter 
VII.  the  reader  will  easily  appreciate  how  idle  is  a 
definition  of  mass  in  terms  of  matter.1 

1  Quantity  belongs  essentially  to  the  sphere  of  sense-impression.  We 
cannot  consider  it  to  have  any  meaning  when  projected  beyond  that 
sphere.  It  seems,  therefore,  illogical  to  apply  the  word  quantity  to  the 
metaphysical  "source"  of  sense-impressions. 


THE  LAWS   OF   MOTION.  3 59 

§  9.  — The  Fifth  Law  of  Motion.     The  Definition  of  Force. 

We  can  now  pass  to  the  next  stage  in  our  investi- 
gation of  the  corpuscular  dance.  Having  selected  a 
standard  corpuscle  Q,  we  conceive  the  masses  rela- 
tive to  it  of  many  other  corpuscles — A,  B,  C,  &c. — 
measured.  If  we  tabulated  these  masses  and  then 
compared  them  with  the  ratio  of  the  mutual  accelera- 
tions of  A  and  B,  B  and  C,  C  and  A,  &c.,  with  a 
view  of  ascertaining  whether  there  were  any  relation 
between  the  mutual  accelerations  of  each  pair  and 
their  masses,  we  should  very  soon  discover  a  fifth 
important  law  of  motion,  namely,  that  the  ratio  of  the 
acceleration  of  A  due  to  B  to  the  acceleration  of  B  due 
to  A  is  exactly  equal  to  the  ratio  of  the  mass  of  B  to 
the  mass  of  A,  or  in  simple  algebraical  notation  : — 

Acceleration  of  A  due  to  B       Mass  of  B  ,  x 

L-     =  ,    ,    (y)» 

Acceleration  of  B  due  to  A       Mass  of  A 

This  is  expressed  briefly  by  the  statement  that 
mutual  accelerations  are  inversely  as  masses.  The 
validity  of  this  statement  is  demonstrated  in  precisely 
the  same  manner  as  the  fourth  law  of  motion.  We 
note  that  if 'unity  be  taken  as  representing  the  mass 
of  the  standard  corpuscle,1  Q,  the  definition  of  mass 
on  p.  358  may  be  replaced  by  the  formula  :>- 

Acceleration  of  Q  due  to  A  _  Mass  of  A  ,  •« 

Acceleration  of  A  due  to  Q       Mass  of  Q 

a  result  in  perfect  accordance  with  the  law  just  stated. 

Now  this  law  may  be  put  into  a  slightly  different 

form.     By  a  well-known  proposition  2  the  product  of 

1  That  is,  the  ratio  of  the  mutual  accelerations  of  Q  and  an  absolutely 
identical  corpuscle.     These  accelerations  must  by  symmetry  be  exactly 
equal,  and  hence  their  ratio,  the  mass  of  Q,  must  be  taken  as  unity. 

2  Euclid,  vi.  1 6,  interpreted  arithmetically. 


360  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

the  means  in  any  proportion  is  equal  to  that  of  the" 
extremes.     Hence  it  follows  that  :— 

Mass  of  A  X  Acceleration  of  A  due  to  B  is  equal  to 
Mass  of  B  X  Acceleration  of  B  due  to  A; 

We  will,  then,  give  a  name  to  this  product  of  mass 
into  acceleration  ;  we  will  term  the  product  of  the 
mass  of  A  into  the  acceleration  of  A  due  to  the 
presence  of  B,  the  force  of  B  on  A.  This  force  will 
be  considered  to  have  the  direction  and  sense  of  the 
acceleration  of  A  due  to  B,  while  its  magnitude  will 
be  obtained  by  multiplying  the  number  of  units  in  the 
acceleration  of  A  due  to  B  by  the  number  of  units  in 
the  mass  of  A.  Thus  the  proper  measure  of  a  force 
will  be  its  number  of  units  of  mass-acceleration. 
Remembering  that  the  accelerations  of  A  and  B  are 
of  opposite  sense,  we  can  now  restate  our  fifth  law  in 
new  language,  thus  : — 

The  force  0/B  on  A  is  equal  and  opposite  to  the  force 
of  A  on  B  ; 

Or,  as  it  was  originally  stated  by  Newton  himself: — 

" 'Action  and  Reaction  are  equal  and  opposite  " I  .     .  (t). 

Now  it  is  clear  that  with  our  definition  force  is 
a  certain  measure  of  how  a  corpuscle  is  dancing 
relative  to  a  second  corpuscle,  this  measure  depend- 
ing partly  on  the  individual  character  of  the  first 
corpuscle  (its  mass)  and  partly  on  the  attention  it  is 
paying  to  the  presence  of  a  second  corpuscle  (its 
acceleration  due  to  the  second  corpuscle).  That 
this  measure  is  scientifically  a  convenient  one  is 
proven  by  its  general  use,  and  may  be  almost  fore- 
seen by  comparing  the  simplicity  of  the  statement 

1  "  Actioni  contrariam  semper  et  aquaUm  esse  reactiondn" 


THE  LA\VS  OF  MOTION.  361 

(e)  with  the  complexity  of  (7).  The  definition  of 
force  we  have  reached  is  a  perfectly  intelligible  one  ; 
it  is  completely  freed  from  any  notion  of  matter  as 
"  the  moving  thing,"  or  from  any  notion  of  a  meta- 
physical "  cause  of  motion."  We  have  only  to  take 
the  step  which  represents  the  acceleration  of  A  due 
to  B's  presence  and  to  stretch  or  magnify  its  length 
in  the  ratio  of  A's  mass  to  the  mass  of  the  standard 
body  Q,  and  we  have  a  new  step  which  represents  B's 
force  on  A.  Force  is  accordingly  an  arbitrary  con- 
ceptual measure  of  motion  without  any  perceptual 
equivalent. 

The  distinction  between  the  definition  of  force  thus 
given  and  that  to  be  found  in  the  ordinary  text- 
books *  may  at  first  sight  seem  slight  to  the  reader, 
but  the  writer  ventures  to  think  that  the  distinction 
makes  all  the  difference  between  an  intelligible  and  an 
unintelligible  theory  of  life,  between  sound  physical 
science  and  crude  metaphysical  materialism.  Causa- 
tion, as  we  have  had  occasion  more  than  once  to 
point  out,  is  only  intelligible  in  the  perceptual  sphere 
as  antecedence  in  a  routine  of  sense-impressions.  In 
the  conceptual  sphere,  on  the  other  hand,  the  cause 
of  change  in  the  motion  of  our  corpuscles  lies  solely  in 
our  desire  to  form  an  accurate  mechanical  model  of 
the  world  of  phenomena.  For  every  definite  con- 
figuration of  the  corpuscles  we  postulate  certain 
mutual  accelerations  as  a  mode  of  bringing  our 
mechanism  into  tune  with  our  sense-impressions  of 

1  "Force  is  any  cause  which  tends  to  alter  a  body's  natural  (sic!) 
state  of  rest,  or  of  uniform  motion  in  a  straight  line  "  (Tait's  Dynamics 
of  a  Particle,  art.  53).  It  is  perhaps  unnecessary  to  remark  that  we 
cannot  conceive  any  body  to  be  naturally  at  rest  or  moving  in  a  straight 
line,  unless  the  word  natural  be  re-defined  in  some  artificial  sense. 


362  THE  GRAMMAR   OF  SCIENCE. 

change.  Force  as  an  arbitrary  measure  of  these 
conceptual  changes  in  motion  is  intelligible.  On 
the  other  hand,  to  project  the  cause  of  motion  into 
something  behind  sense-impression  is  to  dogmatically 
assert  causation  where  we  cannot  know,  to  illogically 
infer  from  the  like  to  the  unlike  (pp.  72, 1 86).  The  only 
alternative  is  to  consider  force  as  an  antecedent  group 
of  sense-impressions ;  this,  however,  is  not  only  to 
project  our  purely  conceptual  notions  of  motion  into 
the  perceptual  field,  but  it  throws  upon  us  the  duty  of 
defining  the  particular  group  of  sense-impressions  to 
which  force  corresponds.  We  have  already  spoken 
of  the  "  muscular  sensation  of  force  "  (p.  327),  which, 
if  we  project  conceptions  into  the  perceptual  field,  is 
more  accurately  to  be  described  as  a  sense-impression 
of  mutual  acceleration  indissolubly  linked  to  the  fact 
of  consciousness.  It  throws  absolutely  no  light  on 
the  cause  of  motion  in  such  "  automata  without 
consciousness,"  as  we  must  conceive  "  phenomenal 
corpuscles  "  to  be.  Hence,  whichever  way  we  turn, 
the  current  definitions  of  both  mass  and  force  lead 
us  only  into  metaphysical  obscurity.  Mass  as  the 
quantity  of  matter  in  a  body,  matter  as  that  which 
perceptually  moves,  force  as  that  which  changes  its 
motion,  are  solely  and  purely  names  which  serve  to 
cloak  human  ignorance.  This  ignorance  is  at  bottom 
the  ignorance  of  why  there  is  routine  in  our  sense- 
impressions,  and  with  this  question  of  routine  we 
have  already  fully  dealt  (pp.  122-8).  But  science 
answers  no  why — it  simply  provides  a  shorthand 
description  of  the  how  of  our  sense-impressions  ; 
and  it  therefore  follows  that  if  mass  and  force  are 
to  be  used  as  scientific  terms  they  must  be  symbols 
by  aid  of  which  we  describe  this  how.  It  is  thus  that 


THE  LAWS  OF   MOTION.  363 

I  have  dealt  with  them ;  we  have  seen  that  to  briefly 
describe  the  corpuscular  dance,  which  forms  our  con- 
ceptual model  of  the  universe,  the  notions  of  mass 
and  force  as  based  on  mutual  accelerations  arise 
naturally  and  with  intelligible  definitions. 

§  10. — Equality  of  Masses  Tested  by  Weighing. 
Although  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  review  the 
whole  field  of  mechanics,  it  is  still  necessary  to  in- 
dicate to  the  reader  that  our  definitions  of  mass  and 
force  would  ultimately  lead  us  to  the  same  conclu- 
sions as  he  will  find  in  current  physical  text-books. 
In  the  first  place  we  will  investigate  an  elementary 
problem  which  will  lead  us  to  a  mode  of  testing  the 
equality  of  masses.  Suppose  we  had  two  particles  A 
and  B  of  masses  m&  and  m\>  in  the  same  field,  and 
we  will  suppose  them  placed  in  a  horizontal  line,  A 
to  the  left  and  B  to  the  right.  Now,  owing  to  the 
presence  of  some  system  to  the  left  of  A,  which  we 
need  not  definitely  describe,  we  will  suppose  A  to 
have  an  acceleration  represented  by  g  units  horizon- 
tally to  the  left.  Similarly  B,  owing  to  some  other 
system,  shall  have  a  horizontal  acceleration  of  g  units 
to  the  right.  Further,  A  and  B  will  mutually  accele- 
rate each  other,  and  we  will  represent  B's  acceleration 
of  A  from  left  to  right  by  the  symbol  f\^  and  A's  of  B 
by./ab>  which  will  be  in  the  opposite  sense.  We  are 
going  to  choose  a  particular  "  physical  field  "  for  the 
acceleration  of  A  and  B  ;  they  shall  be  linked 
together  so  that  their  distance  cannot  change,  but  the 
link  itself  shall  be  conceived  as  producing  no  accelera- 
tions in  either  A  or  B.  We  might  conceptualize  this 
link  by  aid  of  a  limit  to  actual  perception,  namely, 
by  a  fine  weightless  and  inextensiblc  string.  Such  a 


3^4 


THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 


string  would  not  in  itself  produce  sensible  accelera- 
tions in  A  or  B.  Since  the  string  is  inextensible,  the 
whole  system  must  move  in  the  same  direction,  say 
from  right  to  left.  Then  clearly  the  velocity  of  A 
must  be  at  all  times  equal  to  the  velocity  of  B,  or  the 
string  would  be  stretched.  But  if  the  velocities  of  A 
and  B  are  always  equal,  their  accelerations  must  also 


FIG.  23. 

be  equal,  or  their  velocities,  being  differently  spurted, 
would  begin  to  differ.  Hence  we  conclude  that  the 
total  acceleration  of  A  towards  the  left  must  be  equal 
to  the  total  acceleration  of  B  in  the  same  direction,  or 
in  symbols  : — 

£— /ba=/ab—  £ (f.). 

But  by  the  fifth  law  of  motion  (i.e.  (y),  p.  359) 
-a=—    •  (ii) 

/ab         ma  11L' 


THE   LAWS   OF   MOTION.  365 

Thus  (i.)  and  (ii.)  are  two  simple  relations  to  find  f^ 
and  /ab-     By  elementary  algebra  we  have  : — 


=    2 


Hence  we  deduce  :  — 

Acceleration  of  A  or  B  to  the  left  =  g—  /ba  =  "/a  ~  ;;/b  ^  .     .    (iii.  ) 

;//a  +  ;/Zb 

Further  :  — 

Force  of  B  on  A  =  mass  of  A  X  acceleration  of  A  due  to  B. 

=       »/a  X  /ba, 


P, 


«=     Wb  X  j^b,  or  Force  of  A  on  B. 

Now  this  force  of  B  on  A  is  what  we  usually  term 
the  tension  in  the  string.  Hence  we  have  :  — 

Tension  in  the  string  =  2  -^a—-^-  £•  .....    (iv.). 

Wa.  +  ^b 

A  further  important  point  has  now  to  be  noticed. 
In  order  that  A  and  B  should  be  at  rest  relative  to 
the  field  which  produces  the  acceleration  gt  it  will  be 
necessary  that  their  velocities  should  always  be  zero, 
and  this  involves  that  the  changes  in  their  velocities, 
or  their  accelerations,  should  always  be  zero.  But  the 
only  way  in  which  these  accelerations  can  be  zero  is 
seen  at  once  from  (iii.)  to  arise  from  m&  and  m\>  or  the 
masses  of  A  and  B,  being  equal,  for  then  the  dif- 
ference, m&—m\>  is  zero.  Thus  rest  will  depend  on  the 
equality  of  the  masses  of  A  and  B. 

A  further  conceptual  notion  can  now  be  introduced, 
namely,  that  the  terminal  physical  effects  —  consequent 
sense-impressions  —  are  not  altered  in  magnitude,  only 
in  direction,  by  carrying  a  weightless  inextensible 


366  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

string  round  any  "  perfectly  smooth  "  body.  This 
again  is  a  purely  conceptual  limit  to  a  very  real  per- 
ceptual experience.  Now  we  will  suppose  our  string 
placed  round  a  perfectly  smooth  horizontal  cylinder 
or  peg  inserted  under  it  at  its  mid-point  C,  so  that 
the  portions  eA,  e'E  of  the  string  hang  vertically 
downwards.  We  can  further  suppose  that  the  par- 
ticular systems,  which  produce  the  acceleration  g  in 
both  A  and  B,  are  now  replaced  by  the  single  system 
of  the  earth,  for  Galilei  has  demonstrated  that  all 
particles  at  the  same  place  on  the  surface  of  the 
earth  are  to  be  conceived  as  having  the  same  vertical 
acceleration  (g)  towards  the  surface.  We  conclude, 
therefore,  that  if  two  particles  be  connected  by  a 
weightless  inextensible  string  placed  over  a  perfectly 
smooth  cylinder,  the  acceleration  of  one  downwards 
and  the  other  upwards  is  given  by  the  relation  (iii.) 
and  the  tension  in  the  string  by  (iv.).  Hence,  if  the 
particles  are  to  be  at  rest,  or  to  "  balance  each  other," 
their  masses  must  be  equal.  In  this  case,  since  m&  = 
;;/b,  the  tension  in  the  string  equals  m&  X  g,  or  equals 
the  product  of  the  mass  of  A  into  the  acceleration  of 
A  due  to  the  earth ;  that  is,  equals  the  force  of  the 
earth  on  A.  This  force  is  termed  the  iveight  of  A, 
and  since  m&  ~  m^  it  follows  that  the  weight  of  A  is 
equal  to  the  weight  of  B. 

In  this  investigation,  therefore,  we  have  reached  the 
simplest  conceptual  notion  of  a  weighing-machine — 
an  inextensible  string,  with  the  particles  suspended 
from  its  extremities,  placed  over  a  smooth  cylinder. 
If  the  weights  of  the  particles  are  equal,  their  masses 
will  also  be  equal,  and  they  will  balance.  Thus 
equality  of  masses  may  be  tested  by  weighing. 
Another  important  result  also  flows  from  this  dis- 


THE   LAWS  OF   MOTION.  367 

cussion.  If  a  particle  suspended  by  a  string  be  at 
rest  relative  to  the  earth,  then  its  weight  will  be 
equal  to  the  tension  in  the  string.  Hence,  if  the 
earth-acceleration  g  at  any  place  be  known,  we  have 
a  means  of  measuring  mass  in  terms  of  tension. 
A  further  development  of  this  principle  forms  the 
basis  of  important  methods  of  determining  the 
equality  of  masses  by  the  equality  of  strains  (p.  242) 
due  to  equal  tensions. 

§  1 1 . — How  far  does  the  Mechanism  of  the  Fourth  and  Fifth 
Laws  of  Motion  extend? 

Before  we  conclude  this  discussion  of  mass,  there 
are  still  several  points  with  regard  to  it  which  must 
be  elucidated  even  in  an  elementary  work  like  the 
present.  We  have  first  to  ask  whether  our  fourth 
and  fifth  laws  of  motion,  with  the  definitions  of  mass 
and  force  involved  in  them,  must  be  conceived  as 
holding  for  the  whole  range  of  corpuscles  from  ether- 
element  to  particle.  The  same  difficulty,  of  course, 
arises  with  regard  to  force  as  arose  with  regard  to 
acceleration,  if  we  conceive  prime-atoms  as  pos- 
sibly, and  chemical  atoms  and  molecules  as  almost 
certainly,  extended  bodies.  There  cease  to  be  defi- 
nite points  between  which  the  mutual  accelerations, 
and  accordingly  the  forces,  act.  We  are  thrown  back 
on  the  conception  that  if  these  laws  are  to  be  applied 
to  atoms  and  molecules,  it  must  be  to  the  action  and  re- 
action between  the  elementary  parts  of  those  corpuscles 
and  to  the  masses  of  the  elementary  parts  that  our 
laws  refer.  From  the  action  of  these  elementary 
parts  on  each  other  we  must,  then,  deduce  by  aid 
of  the  above  laws  the  total  action  between  two  atoms 
or  two  molecules.  This  will  not  necessarily  be  mea- 


368  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

surable  by  a  single  force  acting  between  two  definite 
points. 

Further  difficulties,  however,  arise  with  regard  to 
our  conception  of  mass.  Is  the  mass  of  an  ether- 
element  of  the  same  character  as  the  mass  of  an 
atom,  or  a  molecule,  or  a  particle  ?  This  seems  very 
doubtful  indeed.  If  the  ratios  of  the  mutual  accelera- 
tions of  two  ether-elements,  of  two  atoms  and  of  two 
particles  be  each  in  themselves  constant  and  capable 
of  leading  us  to  a  clear  definition  of  mass  for  each 
type,  it  is  still  by  no  means  certain  whether  the  ratio 
of  the  mutual  accelerations  of  an  ether-element  and 
a  particle  are  inversely  as  the  ratio  of  the  ether- 
element  mass  to  the  particle  mass.  Possibly  we 
cannot  conceive  these  masses  measurable  by  the  same 
standard. 

If  the  prime-atom  consist  of  ether  in  motion,  then 
its  mass  would  certainly  vanish  with  this  motion  ; 
but  the  ether-elements  which  formed  the  prime-atom 
would  still  retain  their  ether-mass.  Hence  it  seems 
likely  that  the  possibility  of  a  velocity  entering  into 
the  mass  of  gross  "  matter "  may  hinder  us  from 
asserting  that  the  ratio  of  the  mutual  accelerations 
of  ether-element  and  particle  is  "inversely  as  their 
masses."  Thus  the  idea  of  mechanical  action  and 
reaction  between  ether  and  gross  "  matter  "  becomes 
very  obscure.  Of  the  validity  of  postulating  these  laws 
for  particles  there  can  be  small  doubt ;  'they  may  pos- 
sibly suffice  to  describe  the  relation  of  ether-elements 
to  each  other,  but  they  cannot  be  dogmatically 
asserted  of  the  action  between  ether  and  gross 
"  matter."  I  have  purposely  led  the  reader  to  these 
difficult  and  still  unsettled  points,  because  physicists 
finding  that  certain  laws  of  motion  applied  to  par- 


LAWS  OF  MOTION;  369 

tides  will  suffice  to  describe  our  perceptual  experience 
of  physical  bodies,  are,  I  venture  to  think,  too  apt  to 
assert  that  these  same  laws  hold  throughout  the 
whole  of  the  conceptual  model  by  which  they 
describe  the  universe.  They  would  admit  that  special 
modes  of  acceleration  like  gravitation,  magnetiza- 
tion, &c.,  &c.,  probably  flow  from  the  manner  in 
which  the  prime-atom  and  the  particle  are  to  be 
conceived  as  constituted.  But  there  may  be  more 
than  this  to  be  admitted — the  greater  part  of  the  laws 
of  motion  as  we  state  them  for  particles  may  also 
flow  from  the  peculiar  structure  of  the  particle. 
They  may  largely  result  from  the  nature  we  postu- 
late for  the  ether  and  from  the  particular  types  of 
ether-motion  by  aid  of  which  we  construct  the  various 
phases  of  gross  "  matter." 

It  is  not,  therefore,  questioning  the  well-established 
results  of  modern  physics  when  we  ask  whether  to 
conceive  the  ether  as  a  pure  mechanism  x  is,  after  all, 
scientific.  The  object  of  science  is  to  describe  in 
the  fewest  words  the  widest  range  of  phenomena,  and 
it  is  quite  possible  that  a  conception  of  the  ether 
may  one  day  be  formed  in  which  the  mechanism  of 
gross  "  matter  "  itself  may,  to  a  great  extent,  be  re- 
sumed. Indeed,  it  is  on  these  points  of  the  constitu- 
tion of  the  ether  and  the  structure  of  the  prime-atom 
that  physical  theory  is  at  present  chiefly  at  fault, 
There  is  plenty  of  opportunity  for  careful  experi- 
ments to  define  more  narrowly  the  perceptual  facts 
we  want  to  describe  scientifically  ;  but  there  is  still 
more  need  for  a  brilliant  use  of  the  scientific  imagina- 

1  By  a  pure  mechanism  the  writer  means  the  reader  to  understand  a 
system  which  is  conceived  to  obey  (t!t  the  fundamental  laws  of  moticfl 
as  stated  in  mechanical  treatises. 

25 


THE   GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

tion  (p.  36).  There  are  greater  conceptions  yet  to  bd 
formed  than  the  law  of  gravitation  or  the  evolution  of 
species  by  natural  selection.  It  is  not  problems  that 
are  wanting,  but  the  inspiration  to  solve  them  ;  and 
those  who  shall  unravel  them  will  stand  the  compeers 
of  Newton  and  Darwin. 


§  12. — Density  as  the  Basis  of  the  Kinetic  Scale. 

If  our  mechanism  as  it  is  formulated  in  the  above 
laws  of  motion  can  only  be  definitely  asserted  as  true 
for  particles,  we  have  still  to  ask  how  the  geometri- 
cal forms  by  which  we  symbolize  perceptual  bodies 
are  to  be  conceived  as  constructed  from  particles, 
and  how  many  different  families  of  particles  we  are  to 
postulate.  Now  in  order  to  appreciate  the  answer  to 
this  question,  we  must  define  what  we  mean  by  same- 
ness of  substance.  Suppose  we  take  two  portions  of 
different  bodies,  or  of  the  same  body,  and  suppose  we 
find  these  portions,  however  we  test  them,  present  to 
us  the  same  groupings  of  physical  and  chemical 
sense-impressions,  then  we  shall  term  these  portions 
of  the  same  substance.  Further,  if  portions  of  a  body, 
taken  from  any  part  of  it  whatever,  always  appear  of 
the  same  substance,  so  that,  if  we  could  postulate 
exactly  the  same  perceptions  of  shape,  any  one  por- 
tion might  be  mistaken  for  any  other,  then  we  shall 
say  that  the  body  is  homogeneous.  Now  although 
we  cannot  realize  a  particle  in  perception,  still  we 
conceive  that  if  particles  were  to  be  formed  by  taking 
smaller  and  smaller  elements  from  every  part  of  such 
a  homogeneous  substance,  all  these  particles  would 
be  of  equal  mass.  We  thus  come  to  look  upon  oui 
conceptual  symbol  for  a  homogeneous  body  as  a 


fHE  LAWS   OF   MOTiON.  37 1 

Uniform  distribution  of  particles  of  equal  mass 
throughout  a  geometrical  surface.  Applying  our 
laws  as  to  the  motion  of  particles  to  such  a  uniform 
distribution  of  particles,  we  construct  a  motion  for 
the  geometrical  form  which  closely  describes  our 
routine  of  sense-impressions  in  the  case  of  those  per- 
ceptual bodies  which  approximate  to  the  conceptual 
ideal  of  homogeneity.  We  then  define  the  sum  of 
the  masses  of  the  particles  contained  in  any  portion 
of  our  geometrical  form  as  the  mass  of  this  portion. 
From  this  it  follows  at  once  that :  the  masses  of  any 
tivo  portions  of  the  same  homogeneous  substance  are 
proportional  to  their  volumes. 

This  result  is  not  a  truism  x  ;  it  flows  only  from  the 
uniform  distribution  of  particles  which  we  postulate 
for  a  homogeneous  substance,  and  this  distribution  is 
a  conception  only  justified,  like  the  law  of  gravita- 
tion, by  the  results  which  it  describes  being  in  accord- 
ance with  our  perceptual  experience.  If  we  take  two 
small  and  equal  volumes  of  a  homogeneous  substance, 
then  the  smaller  they  are  the  more  nearly  we  can 
describe  our  perceptual  experience  of  them  by  the 
conceptual  symbols,  "  particles  of  equal  mass."  If 
we  take  two  small  and  equal  volumes  of  two  different 
homogeneous  substances,  then,  the  smaller  they  are, 
the  more  nearly  we  can  describe  our  perceptual 
experience  of  them  by  the  conceptual  symbols  of 
"  particles  of  different  mass."  Thus  in  conception 
each  independent  substance  must  be  looked  upon  as 
individualized  for  the  purposes  of  our  mechanical 
model  of  the  universe  by  a  special  mass  for  its 
fundamental  particle.  If  we  take  any  homogeneous 
substance  as  a  standard  substance,  then  if  we  take 

1  It  might  well  be  described  as  the  sixth  fundamental  law  of  motion. 


372  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

small  and  equal  volumes  of  any  given  homogeneous 
substance  and  of  the  standard  substance,  the  ratio  of 
the  masses  of  the  particles  by  which  we  represent 
conceptually  these  volumes  as  they  become  smaller 
and  smaller  is  termed  the  density  of  the  given  homo- 
geneous substance.1  It  follows,  from  the  above  state- 
ment as  to  the  masses  of  two  portions  of  the  same 
homogeneous  substance  being  proportional  to  their 
volumes,  that :  the  density  of  a  given  homogeneous  sub- 
stance is  the  ratio  of  the  masses  of  equal  volumes  of  it 
and  of  tJie  standard  substance. 

If  a  body  be  not  such  that  its  portions,  anywhere 
taken,  present  to  us  the  same  groupings  of  physical 
and  chemical  sense-impressions,  then  the  body  is 
said  to  be  heterogeneous.  If  we  take  small  and 
equal  volumes  of  this  body  from  different  parts, 
then  the  smaller  we  take  them  the  more  nearly 
we  find  that  our  perceptual  experience  of  them 
can  be  described  by  particles  of  different  masses. 
If  we  take  small  and  equal  volumes  "  from  a 
given  point "  of  a  heterogeneous  body  and  from  the 
standard  homogeneous  substance,  then  the  smaller 
We  take  them  the  more  nearly  our  perceptual  ex- 
perience can  be  described  by  the  mutual  action  of  two 
particles.  The  ratio  of  the  mass  of  this  particle  of 
the  heterogeneous  substance  to  that  of  the  particle  of 
the  standard  substance  is  termed  the  density  of  the 
heterogeneous  substance  at  the  given  point.  The 
density  of  such  a  substance  is  therefore  not,  as  in  the 
case  of  a  homogeneous  substance,  the  ratio  of  the 
masses  of  finite  volumes  of  the  given  and  of  the 

1  The  name  adopted  in  the  text-books  is  "specific  gravity,"  but  I 
think  this  term  unfortunately  chosen  and  I  prefer  to  use  the  word 
density  in  this  sense* 


THE   LAWS   OF   MOTION.  373 

standard  substances,  it  is  a  quantity  which  varies  from 
point  to  point  of  the  heterogeneous  body. 

Clearly  the  notion  of  density  thus  discussed  affords 
a  key  to  the  manner  in  which  we  are  to  conceive  the 
symbols  for  physical  bodies  constructed  from  aggre- 
gates of  particles.  By  means  of  density  we  indi- 
vidualize substances  and  kinetically  classify  the 
particles  which  are  the  conceptual  elements  of 
bodies.  Density  forms  the  kinetic  scale  we  have  been 
in  search  of  (p.  355)  ;  it  is  the  fundamental  means  by 
which  we  measure  the  relative  magnitude  of  the 
accelerations  which  we  conceive  the  ideal  elements  of 
bodies  to  experience  in  each  other's  presence.  It 
throws  life  into  the  geometrical  forms  by  means  of 
which  we  conceptualize  the  phenomenal  universe. 

The  reader  must,  however,  be  careful  to  note  that 
the  whole  of  this  discussion  of  density  abounds  in 
purely  ideal  notions.  I  have  defined  homogeneity ; 
but  homogeneity  thus  defined  is  a  limit  drawn  purely 
in  conception  to  a  process  of  comparison  which  can 
be  begun  but  not  completed  perceptually.  No 
perceptual  substance  is  accurately  homogeneous. 
Further,  I  have  spoken  about  taking  "  equal 
volumes,"  a  process  which  is  a  geometrical  concep- 
tion, and  never  exactly  realizable  in  perception, 
where  continuous  boundaries  cannot  be  postulated 
(p.  205).  Then,  again,  I  have  spoken  of  taking  a 
"  volume  at  a  point,"  and  of  the  "density  of  a  hetero- 
geneous body  at  a  point,"  conceptual  limits  again 
having  no  exact  perceptual  equivalents.  Lastly,  I 
have  spoken  of  density  as  equal  to  the  ratio  of  the 
masses  of  "  certain  volumes,"  and  of  aggregates  of 
particles  as  filling  "  geometrical  forms."  These  indi- 
cations will  be  sufficient  to  show  the  reader  that 


374  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

density,  like  mass,  is  a  conceptual  notion,  an  ideal 
means  of  classifying  the  symbols  of  our  conceptual 
model  of  the  universe.  We  do,  indeed,  choose  these 
densities  so  that  our  model  shall  describe  as  accu- 
rately as  possible  our  perceptual  experience,  but  the 
density  itself  belongs  to  the  conceptual  sphere,  and 
is  defined  with  regard  to  the  geometrical  forms  by 
which  we  symbolize  physical  bodies.  It  is  a  con- 
ceptual link  between  those  geometrical  forms  and  the 
accelerations  with  which  we  endow  them.  The  im- 
portance of  this  point  must  be  insisted  upon,  for  it  is 
this  relation  between  geometrical  volume  and  mass 
in  the  case  of  homogeneous  substances  which  led 
physicists  to  the  definition  of  mass  as  the  "  quantity  of 
matter  in  a  body"  (p.  358).  The  geometrical  form  was 
first  projected  into  the  phenomenal  world,  and  then 
this  form  filled  with  the  metaphysical  source  of 
sense-impressions — matter.  Mass  as  proportional  to 
volume  thus  became  mass  as  a  measure  of  matter, 
and  the  sluice-gate  was  opened  for  that  flood  of  meta- 
physics which  has  threatened  to  undermine  the  solid 
basis  of  physical  science. 

§  13. — The  Influence  of  Aspect  on  the  Corpuscular  Dance. 

Hitherto  I  have  only  been  dealing  with  the  value 
of  the  ratio  of  the  mutual  accelerations  of  two  cor- 
puscles. The  discussion  of  the  absolute  values  of 
these  mutual  accelerations  for  each  individual  field 
would  carry  us  through  the  whole  range  of  modern 
physics  ;  we  should  have  to  deal  with  those  special 
laws  of  motion  which  describe  the  phenomena  we 
class  under  the  heads  of  cohesion,  gravitation,  capil- 
larity, electrification,  magnetization,  &c.,  &c.  To 
discuss  these  does  qot  fall  within  the  scope  of  oijr 


THE  LAWS  OF  MOTION.  375 

present  work,  but  there  are  one  or  two  general 
points  I  must  notice  here.  I  proceed,  in  the  first 
place,  to  state  in  accurate  terms  the  second  problem 
suggested  on  p.  354.  I  ask  :  Are  the  absolute  magni- 
tudes of  the  mutual  accelerations  of  two  corpuscles 
influenced  by  the  aspect  they  present  to  each  other  ? 

Now  no  very  decisive  answer  can  yet  be  given  to 
this  very  important  question  of  aspect  influence.  If 
we  discriminate  between  the  various  types  of  cor- 
puscles, there  seem  no  facts  of  our  perceptual  ex- 
perience that  would  lead  us  to  suppose  that  aspect 
plays  any  part  in  the  mutual  action  of  ether-elements. 
With  regard  to  the  prime-atom,  we  can  only  leave 
the  matter  unsettled  ;  if  this  atom  were  a  vortex- ring 
aspect  would  be  of  importance,  but  if  it  were  an 
ether-squirt  it  would  not.  On  the  other  hand,  in 
both  cases,  and  probably  in  most  other  conceivable 
mechanisms,  aspect  would  play  a  great  role  in  the 
mutual  actions  between  chemical  atoms  and  between 
molecules.  These  groups,  built  up  of  comparatively 
few  prime-atoms,  can  hardly  accelerate  each  other's 
motion  in  the  same  manner  however  they  turn 
towards  each  other.  It  is  to  this  change  of  mutual 
acceleration  with  change  of  aspect  that  we  have  pro- 
bably to  look  for  aid  in  our  conceptual  attempts 
to  describe  such  phenomena  as  crystallization  and 
magnetization.  As  to  the  particle,  aspect  has  pro- 
bably little  influence  when  we  are  dealing  with 
particles  at  distances  great  compared  with  their 
vanishingly  small  size  ;  but  it  is  still  conceivable  that 
if  all  the  molecules  in  a  particle  had  a  similar  aspect, 
aspect  might  be  important  in  determining  the  action 
of  this  particle  on  an  adjacent  particle.  In  the 
phenomenon  of  gravitation  aspect  does  not,  however, 


3/6  THE  GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

play  any  part  that  we  can  perceptually  appreciate. 
On  the  whole  we  conclude  that  aspect  must  be  con- 
sidered as  a  significant  factor  in  determining  the 
absolute  magnitudes  of  mutual  accelerations,  but  the 
exact  influence  which  the  "  posture  "  of  our  dancers 
has  upon  the  mode  in  which  they  dance  remains  still 
one  of  the  obscure  points  of  physics  (see  pp.  369,  386), 

§  14. —  The  Hypothesis  of  Modified  Action  and  the  Synthesis  oj 
Motion. 

The  next  problem  that  we  have  to  consider  is  one 
that  is  of  extreme  importance  when  we  are  dealing 
with  the  synthesis  of  motion,  or  the  construction  of 
the  motion  of  complex  from  simple  groups  of  cor- 
puscles (p.  283).  It  is  the  problem  of  modified  action. 
I  may  state  it  thus  : — 

If  we  have  found  the  acceleration  of  A  in  the  pre- 
sence of  B,  will  the  magnitude r  of  this  acceleration 
be  altered  when  C  is  introduced  into  the  presence  of 
A  and  B  ?  This  problem  may  be  put  a  little 
differently,  thus  :  Suppose  we  find  when  A  and  B 
are  alone  in  the  field  that  the  acceleration  of  A 
due  to  B  is  represented  by  the  step  b,  and  that  when 
A  and  C  are  alone  in  the  field  the  acceleration 
of  A  due  to  C  is  represented  by  the  step  c,  then 
when  both  B  and  C  are  in  the  field  will  these  accele- 
rations remain  the  same,  and  consequently  will  the 
total  accelerating  effect  of  B  and  C  be  represented, 
owing  to  the  law  we  have  stated  for  combining 
accelerations  (p.  282),  by  the  diagonal  step  d  of  the 

1  We  have  already  seen  that  the  ratio  of  the  mutual  accelerations,  or 
of  the  masses  of  A  and  B,  is  not  to  be  conceived  as  altered  by  the 
presence  of  other  corpuscles  in  the  field  ;  but  this  leaves  the  question  of 
absolute  magnitudes  unsettled. 


THE  LAWS  OF   MOTION. 


377 


parallelogram,  whose  sides  are  b  and  c?  Or,  on  the 
other  hand,  are  we  to  conceive  that  when  B  and  C  are 
both  in  the  field  the  former  acceleration  b  due  to  B 
is  altered  to  b'  and  the  acceleration  c  due  to  C  to  c\ 
so  that  the  total  acceleration  of  A  is  now  the  diagonal 
</'?  Clearly  if  the  latter  statement  be  correct  the 
synthesis  of  motion  becomes  much  more  complex. 
It  will  still  be  true  that  the  acceleration  of  A  is  com- 
pounded of  the  accelerations  due  to  B  and  C,  but 
these  accelerations  will  depend  not  on  the  respective 
positions  of  B  and  C  relative  to  A,  but  on  the  con- 
figuration of  the  entire  system  A,  B,  C.  It  will  thus 


be  impossible  to  form  complex  motions  from  the 
combination  of  simple  ones,  until  we  have  determined 
how  the  actions  b  and  c  of  B  and  C  alone  are  modified 
into  b'  and  c1  by  being  superposed.  Now  this  ques- 
tion may  also  be  looked  at  from  the  standpoint  of 
force.  If  m  be  the  mass  of  A,  then  mxb  and  mxc 
will  be  the  forces  of  B  and  C  on  A,  and  will  be  repre- 
sented by  steps  m  times  the  steps  b  and  c  in  length 
(p.  360)  If  B  and  C  do  not  modify  each  other's  in- 
fluence, then  their  combined  action,  given  by  the 
acceleration  d  corresponds  to  a  force  which,  measured 
by  the  product  of  mass  and  acceleration,  or  by  m  x  d> 
is  m  tirnes  the  step  d.  This  force  is  termed  the 


3/8  THE  GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

resultant  force ;  and  we  see  that,  since  the  resultant 
and  component  forces  are  respectively  m  times  the 
diagonal  and  the  sides  of  the  acceleration-parallelo- 
gram, these  forces  must  themselves  form  the  diagonal 
and  sides  of  a  parallelogram  A  ft  S  y  which  is  a  mag- 
nified picture  of  the  acceleration-parallelogram.  This 
is  the  famous  parallelogram  of  forces,  and  we  notice 
that  it  follows  at  once  from  the  parallelogram  of 
accelerations  when  we  assume  that  B  and  C  do  not 
modify  each  other's  action.1 

If  they  do  modify  each  other's  action  there  will 
still  be  a  parallelogram  (A  ft'  &'  7')  of  forces,  namely, 
the  resultant  force  m  X  d'  will  be  the  diagonal  of  the 
parallelogram  on  the  sides  m  X  b*  and  m  x  c'.  But  if 
we  mean,  as  physicists  generally  do,  by  the  force  of 
B  on  A,  the  force  when  A  and  B  are  alone  in  the 
field,  and  similarly  by  the  force  of  C  on  A  the  force 
when  A  and  C  are  alone  in  the  field,  then  we  must 
assert  that  on  the  hypothesis  of  modified  action  :  the 
parallelogram  of  forces  is  not  a  synthesis  by  which  we 
can  .truly  combine  forces. 

This  conclusion  may  appear  to  the  reader  so  entirely 
.opposed  to  all  that  he  has  read  of  mechanics,  that  he 
may  be  led  at  once  to  reject  the  hypothesis  of  modi- 
fied action.  One  of  Newton's  laws  of  motion  dis- 
tinctly excludes  indeed  this  hypothesis,  and  a  great 
simplification  in  our  process  of  constructing  complex 
from  simple  mechanical  systems  undoubtedly  arises 
when  we  exclude  it ;  we  have  not  to  deal  with  every 
new  field  afresh,  and  to  re-measure  accelerations  for 
each  variation  of  its  constituent  elements  :  we  simply 

1  This,  for  the  purposes  of  the  physics  of  the  particle,  might  be 
spoken  of  as  the  seventh  law  of  motion. 


THE   LAWS   OF   MOTION.  379 

analyze  it,  break  it  up  into  simple  fields  the  indivi- 
dual motions  of  which  have  been  previously  discussed. 
Yet  it  is  not  scientific  to  assert  that  the  simplest  hypo- 
thesis is  necessarily  correct  (Appendix,  Note  III.) ;  we 
must  ask,  when  we  proceed  to  extend  it  beyond  the 
range  where  it  has  been  found  to  describe  experience, 
whether  it  still  suffices  to  simplify  our  conceptions, 
or  leaves  undescribed  certain  recognized  phases  of 
perception.  Newton's  law  appears  perfectly  sufficient, 
and  may  therefore  be  said  to  be  verified,  when  we  are 
dealing  with  particles  of  gross  "  matter."  The  mutual 
accelerations,  for  example,  of  two  gravitating  particles 
seem  to  be  uninfluenced  by  the  presence  of  a  third 
particle  ;  there  is  nothing,  to  take  a  still  more  concrete 
example,  yet  observed  which  would  compel  us  to 
conceive  that  the  mutual  accelerations,  by  which  we 
describe  the  mutual  dance  of  sun  and  earth,  are  in  the 
least  influenced  by  the  presence  of  the  moon.  Yet  when 
we  come  to  extend  this  law  of  Newton's,  invaluable 
as  it  is  for  dealing  with  particles  of  gross  "  matter," 
to  the  mutual  action  of  molecules,  atoms,  and  ether- 
elements,  there  appears  to  be  considerable  reason  for 
doubting  its  accuracy. 

We  can  conceive  atomic  structures — for  example,  the 
ether-squirt — for  which  modified  action  is  essentially 
true.  There  are  phenomena  of  cohesion  which  can 
hardly  be  described  without  supposing  the  action  of 
two  molecules  A  and  B  to  be  modified  by  the 
presence  of  a  third  molecule  C.1  There  are  chemical 
facts  which  suggest  that  the  introduction  of  a  third 

1  A  fuller  discussion  of  "aspect"  and  "modified  action"  by  the 
author  will  be  found  in  Todhunter's  History  of  Elasticity,  vol.  i.  arts. 
921-31,  1527,  and  vol.  ii.  arts.  276,  304-6.  See  also  the  American 
Journal  of  Mathematics j  vol.  xiii.  pp.  321-2,  345,  353,  36,1, 


380  THE  GRAMMAR   OF  SCIENCE. 

atom  C  may  even  reverse  the  sense  of  the  mutual 
accelerations  of  two  atoms  A  and  B.  Nay,  those 
who,  in  order  to  describe  the  radiation  of  light,  treat 
the  ether  as  an  elastic  jelly  (p.  315),  will  find  that  it  is 
very  difficult  to  conceptualize  its  elastic  structure,  with- 
out asserting  that  the  hypothesis  of  modified  action 
is  true  of  the  ether-elements.  The  parallelogram 
of  forces,  then,  as  a  synthesis  of  motion  must  be 
considered  as  applying  in  the  first  place  to  particles 
of  gross  "  matter  "  ;  its  extension  to  other  corpuscles 
can  only  be  made  cautiously  and  with  continual 
reservation.  Like  so  many  other  features  of  me- 
chanism it  cannot  be  dogmatically  asserted  to  hold 
for  all  corpuscles,  but  it  may  in  itself  flow  from  the 
constitution  we  postulate  for  the  ether  and  the  struc- 
tures we  assume  for  the  various  types  of  gross 
"  matter." 

§  15. — Criticism  of  the  Newtonian  Laws  of  Motion. 

Before  we  close  our  discussion  of  the  laws  of  motion 
it  is  only  just  to  the  reader  to  state  that  the  method 
adopted  differs  widely  from  the  customary  physical 
treatment ;  and  in  deference  to  the  authority  on  which 
that  treatment  is  based  some  comparison  and  criticism 
seems  called  for.  We  have  already  dealt  with  the  cur- 
rent definitions  of  force,  matter,  and  mass,  and  shown 
reasons  for  rejecting  them  as  involving  metaphysical 
obscurity.  When,  therefore,  we  come  across  these 
terms  in  the  statement  of  the  laws  of  motion  we  must 
endeavour  to  interpret  them  in  our  own  sense.  To 
the  reader  on  first  examination  the  Newtonian  state- 
ment of  the  laws  of  motion  may  seem  simpler  than 
that  of  the  present  chapter.  They  are  stated  generally 
of  bodies^  and  appear  to  describe  the  mechanism 


THE   LAWS   OF   MOTION.  381 

under  which  all  bodies  move,  and  therefore  pre- 
sumably describe  the  motion  of  the  whole  range  of 
corpuscles  from  ether-element  to  particle.  Now  this 
loses  sight  of  what  the  present  writer  thinks  a  very 
important  possibility,  namely,  that  not  only  special 
modes  of  motion,  but  much  of  the  mechanism  which 
describes  the  action  of  sensible  bodies,  will  be  found 
ultimately  to  be  involved  in  some  wide-reaching  con- 
ception of  ether  and  atom.  It  is  not  logically  satis- 
factory to  describe  one  mechanism  by  another  of  equal 
complexity;  and  we  must  hope  to  ultimately  concep- 
tualize an  ether  from  the  simple  structure  of  which 
several  of  the  laws  of  motion  postulated  for  particles 
of  gross  "  matter  "  may  directly  flow.  Remembering 
these  points  we  now  turn  to  the  version  of  the  New- 
tonian laws  given  by  Thomson  and  Tait.1 

Law  I. — Every  body  continues  in  its  state  of  rest  or 
of  uniform  motion  in  a  straight  line,  except  in  so  far  as 
it  may  be  compelled  by  force  to  change  that  state. 

Now  the  reader  who  is  acquainted  with  treatises  on 
dynamics  will  remember  that  one  of  the  most  difficult 
chapters  is  frequently  entitled,  Motion  of  a  Body  under 
the  Action  of  no  Forces.  The  motion  described  is  of 
an  extremely  complex  kind.  For  example,  the 
body  may  not  only  be  spinning  about  an  axis,  but 
may  be,  and  as  a  general  rule  is,  conceived  as  con- 
tinually changing  the  axis  about  which  it  spins. 

1  A  Treatise  on  Natural  Philosophy,  part  ii.  pp.  241-7.  The  writer 
will  not  admit  that  he  is  second  to  any  one  in  his  admiration  for  the 
genius  of  Newton,  or  in  his  respect  for  the  authors  of  the  above 
classical  Treatise.  Yet  he  cannot  believe  that  the  two  centuries  which 
have  elapsed  since  Newton  stated  his  Leges  Motiis  "  have  not  shown  a 
necessity  for  any  addition  or  modification  "  !  Old  words  grow  as  men 
are  compelled  to  express  new  ideas  in  terms  of  them,  and  few  definitions 
have  a  virile  life  of  even  a  score  years. 


3§2  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

The  "  state  of  rest  or  of  uniform  motion  in  a  straight 
line  "  is  thus  not  that  which  the  physicist  postulates 
to  describe  the  motion  of  a  body  under  the  action  of 
no  forces.  It  is  quite  true  that  we  conceive  a  certain 
point  termed  the  centre  of  mass  of  such  a  body  to  be 
either  at  rest  or  moving  uniformly  in  a  straight  line; 
this,  however,  is  not  a  conception  which  is  itself 
axiomatic,  but  arises  from  an  application  of  the 
principle  of  the  equality  of  action  and  reaction  to 
the  particles  by  which  we  conceptually  construct  the 
body.  In  the  first  place,  therefore,  the  use  of  the 
word  body  does  not  really  give  generality  to  the 
law,  but  introduces  obscurity  ;  we  ought  at  least  to 
replace  it  by  the  word  particle.  In  the  next  place 
the  law  is  very  wanting  in  explicitness  as  to  what  we 
are  to  understand  by  state  of  rest  or  of  uniform 
motion  in  a  straight  line.  All  motion  must  be  relative 
to  something,  but  Newton  does  not  indicate  with 
regard  to  what,  for  example,  the  relative  path  is  a 
straight  line.  Force  is  also  a  relative  term  (p.  360),  but 
Newton  nowhere  tells  us  what  the  force  on  the  body 
is  related  to.  Thus,  until  a  second  body  (or  other 
particles)  be  introduced  (p.  343),  the  law  remains 
meaningless.  In  the  last  place,  what  are  we  to 
understand  by  the  words,  "  compelled  by  force  to 
change  that  state  "  ?  We  take  force  to  be  a  certain 
measure  of  motion,  namely,  the  product  of  mass  into 
acceleration  ;  then  to  assert  the  absence  of  force  is  to 
assert  the  absence  of  acceleration,  or  the  law  would 
merely  contain  the  platitude  that  without  change  of 
motion  a  particle  moves  uniformly.  But  Newton 
certainly  meant  something  more  than  this,  for  he  was 
thinking  of  force  in  the  sense  of  mediaeval  metaphysics 
as  "  a  cause  of  change  in  motion."  Now  the  nearest 


THE  LAWS   OF   MOTION.  383 

approach  we  can  get  to  his  idea  is  that  position 
relative  to  surrounding  particles  determines  a  given 
particle's  acceleration,  and  thus  the  first  law  is  seen, 
liberally  interpreted,  to  amount  to  the  statement  that 
surrounding  circumstances  determine  acceleration — - 
that  without  the  presence  of  other  particles  there  is 
no  acceleration.  This  is  the  important  principle  of 
inertia  to  which  we  have  already  referred  (p.  342),  but 
it  certainly  appears  to  be  stated  with  great  obscurity 
in  Newton's  first  law  of  motion.  Further,  even  in  this 
law,  as  I  have  restated  it,  no  hint  is  given  as  to  what 
application  the  principle  may  have  to  other  corpuscles 
than  particles  of  gross  "  matter  "  (p.  344). 

Law  II. — Change  of  motion  is  proportional  to  force 
applied^  and  takes  place  in  the  direction  of  the  straight 
line  in  which  force  acts. 

This  is  a  veritable  metaphysical  somersault.  How 
the  imperceptible  cause  of  change  in  motion  can  be 
applied  in  a  straight  line  surpasses  comprehension  ; 
the  only  straight  line  that  can  be  conceived,  or,  as 
some  physicists  would  have  it,  perceived,  is  the  direc- 
tion of  change  of  motion.  We  may  assert  that  the 
imperceptible  has  this  direction,  but  to  postulate  that 
the  imperceptible  will  determine  this  direction  for  us 
seems  to  be  pure  metaphysics.  We  come  down  on  our 
feet  again,  however,  when  we  interpret  this  law  as  simply 
indicating  that  physically  force  is  going  to  be  taken 
as  a  measure  for  some  change  in  motion  (p.  360).  As 
to  the  exact  meaning  of  change  of  motion  taking 
place  in  a  straight  line,  all  the  real  difficulties  as  to 
what  thing  we  are  to  suppose  changing  its  motion, 
and  what  is  the  presence  associated  with  this  change 
of  motion,  i.e.,  the  difficulties  about  the  line  joining  two 
corpuscles  (p.  367),  are  concealed  by  talking  vaguely 


384  THE   GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

about  force  as  an  entity  "  acting  in  a  straight  line.5' 
Furthermore,  if  the  "  change  of  motion  "  is  to  be  that 
of  a  body,  not  a  particle,  then  we  naturally  ask  which 
point  of  the  body  will  have  its  motion  changed  in  the 
direction  of  a  straight  line.  We  are  thus  again 
brought  face  to  face  with  the  fact  that  the  motion  of 
"  bodies "  is  far  more  complex  than  is  in  the  least 
indicated  by  this  law. 

Sir  William  Thomson  and  Professor  Tait  have 
restated  the  Second  Laiv  in  the  following  form  : — 

When  any  forces  whatever  act  on  a  body,  then, 
^vhether  the  body  be  originally  at  rest  or  moving  zvith 
any  velocity  and  in  any  direction,  each  force  produces  in 
the  body  the  exact  change  of  motion  which  it  would  have 
produced  had  it  acted  singly  on  the  body  originally  at 
rest. 

These  conclusions  they  consider  really  involved  in 
Newton's  Second  Law.  The  same  difficulty  repeats 
itself  here  with  regard  to  the  interpretation  of  the 
term  "  body."  Further,  the  law  thus  expressed  denies 
the  possibility  of  "  modified  action  "  (pp.  376-80),  and 
the  likelihood  that  in  certain  cases  the  velocity  of 
corpuscles  may  help  to  determine  their  mutual  acce- 
lerations (p.  349).  It  thus  asserts  the  absolute  vali- 
dity of  that  synthesis,  which  we  have  termed  the 
parallelogram  of  forces,  and  which  we  have  ventured 
to  suggest  cannot  be  dogmatically  asserted  of  cor- 
puscles of  all  types. 

Law  III. — To  every  action  there  is  always  an  equal 
and  contrary  reaction,  or  the  mutual  actions  of  any  two 
bodies  are  always  equal  and  oppositely  directed. 

If  we  replace  "  bodies  "  by  "  particles  " — for  the 
mutual  action  of  two  bodies  is  more  complex  than 
a  reader  just  starting  his  study  of  mechanism  would 


THE   LAWS  OF   MOTION.  385 

imagine,  if  he  naturally  interpreted  mutual  action  as 
corresponding  to  mutual  acceleration  in  some  one 
line — the  above  law  is  identical  with  our  Fifth  Law 
(p.  359),  and  therefore  we  need  not  repeat  the  quali- 
fying discussion  of  our  §11.  See  Appendix,  Note  II. 
The  Newtonian  laws  of  motion  form  the  starting- 
point  of  most  modern  treatises  on  dynamics,  and  it 
seems  to  me  that  physical  science,  thus  started,  resem- 
bles the  mighty  genius  of  an  Arabian  tale  emerging 
amid  metaphysical  exhalations  from  the  bottle  in  which 
for  long  centuries  it  has  been  corked  down.  When  the 
mists  have  quite  cleared  off  we  shall  see  more  clearly 
its  proportions,  and  there  is  special  need  for  a  strong 
breeze  to  clear  away  our  confused  notions  as  to 
matter,  mass,  and  force.  The  writer  is  far  from 
imagining  that  he  can  accomplish  this  clearance,  but 
he  is  convinced  that  a  firm  basis  for  physics  will  only 
be  found  when  scientists  recognize  that  mechanism  is 
no  reality  of  the  phenomenal  world — that  it  is  solely  the 
mode  by  which  we  conceptually  mimic  the  routine  of  our 
perceptions.  The  semblance  is,  indeed,  so  striking  that 
we  are  able  with  astonishing  accuracy  to  predict  in  vast 
ranges  of  phenomena  what  will  be  the  exact  sequence  of 
our  future  sense-impressions.  If,  however,  the  scientist 
projects  the  whole  of  his  conceptual  machinery  into 
the  perceptual  world  he  throws  himself  open  to  the 
charge  of  being  as  dogmatic  as  either  theologian  or 
metaphysician.  On  the  other  hand,  when  he  simply 
postulates  the  conceptual  value  of  his  symbols  as  a 
mode  of  describing  past  and  predicting  future  percep- 
tual experience,  then  his  position  is  unassailable,  for 
he  asserts  nothing  as  to  the  why  of  phenomena.  But  as 
soon  as  he  does  this,  matter  as  that  which  moves,  and 
force  as  the  cause  of  change  in  motion,  disappear  into 

26 


386  THE   GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

the  limbo  of  self-contradictory  notions.  What  moves 
is  only  a  geometrical  ideal,  and  it  moves  only  in  con- 
ception. Why  things  move  thus  becomes  an  idle 
question,  and  how  things  are  to  be  conceived  as 
moving  the  true  problem  of  physical  science.1 

In  this  field  we  know  much,  but  our  account  of  the 
laws  of  motion  has  been  specially  intended  to  empha- 
size how  great  is  the  room  both  for  further  investigation 
and  for  the  exercise  of  disciplined  imagination.  In 
the  vagueness  of  our  conceptions  of  ether  and  atom 
lies  the  ill-explored  continent  which,  by  clearer  defini- 
tion, the  Galilei  and  Newton  of  the  future  will  annex. 
But  before  this  annexation  there  is  work  for  the 
unpretending  pioneer  in  helping  to  clear  away  the 
jungle  of  metaphysical  notions  which  impedes  the 
progress  of  physical  science. 

SUMMARY. 

The  physicist  forms  a  conceptual  model  of  the  universe  by  aid  of 
corpuscles.  These  corpuscles  are  only  symbols  for  the  component  parts 
of  perceptual  bodies  and  are  not  to  be  considered  as  resembling  definite 
perceptual  equivalents.  The  corpuscles  with  which  we  have  to  deal  are 
ether-element,  prime-atom,  atom,  molecule,  and  particle.  We  conceive 
them  to  move  in  the  manner  which  enables  us  most  accurately  to  describe 
the  sequences  of  our  sense-impressions.  This  manner  of  motion  is  summed 
up  in  the  so-called  laws  of  motion.  These  laws  hold  in  the  first  place  for 
particles,  but  they  have  been  frequently  assumed  to  be  true  for  all 
corpuscles.  It  is  more  reasonable,  however,  to  conceive  that  a  great 
part  of  mechanism  flows  from  the  structure  of  gross  "matter." 

The  proper  measure  of  mass  is  found  to  be  a  ratio  of  mutual  acceler- 


1  "  Such  demonstrations,  however,  only  show  how  all  these  things 
may  be  ingeniously  made  out  and  disentangled,  not  how  they  may  truly 
subsist  in  nature  ;  and  indicate  the  apparent  motions  only,  and  a  system 
of  machinery  arbitrarily  devised  and  arranged  to  produce  them — not 
the  very  causes  and  truth  of  things  "  (Bacon,  De  Augmentis,  bk.  iii. 
chap.  iv.). 


THE  LAWS   OF   MOTION.  387 

ations,  and  force  is  seen  as  a  certain  measure  of  motion,  and  not  its  cause. 
The  customary  definitions  of  mass  and  force,  as  well  as  the  Newtonian 
statement  of  the  laws  of  motion,  are  shown  to  abound  in  metaphysical 
obscurities.  It  is  also  questionable  whether  the  principles  involved  in 
the  current  statements  as  to  the  superposition  and  combination  of  forces 
are  scientifically  correct  when  applied  to  atoms  and  molecules.  The 
hope  for  future  progress  lies  in  clearer  conceptions  of  the  nature  of 
ether  and  of  the  structure  of  gross  "  matter." 


LITERATURE. 

The  views  put  forward  in  this  chapter  were  reached  when  the  author 
was  studying  the  laws  of  motion  for  teaching  purposes  in  1882,  and  were 
developed  for  the  purpose  of  college  lectures  in  1884  and  subsequent 
years.  A  brief  account  of  them  was  published  in  1885,  on  pp.  267-71 
of  Clifford's  Common  Sense  of  the  Exact  Sciences,  but  the  only  pub- 
lished work  in  which  the  author  has  found  any  indication  of  similar 
opinions,  or  from  the  perusal  of  which  he  has  received  any  help  or 
encouragement,  and  the  only  work  he  can  therefore  heartily  recommend 
to  the  reader  is  : — 

MACH,  E. — Die  Mechanik  in  ihrer  Entwicklung,   S.  174-228.     Leip- 
zig, 1883. 

The  customary  physical  view  of  the  Laws  of  Motion  will  be  found  in : — 
CLERK-MAXWELL,  J. — Matter  and  Motion,  pp.  33-48.  London, 

1876. 

THOMSON,  Sir  W.,  and  TAIT,  P.  G. — Treatise  on  Natural  Philosophy, 
part  i.  pp.  219-24,  240-49.     Cambridge,  1879. 


CHAPTER  IX. 
LIFE. 

§  i. —  The  Relation  of  Biology  to  Physics. 

IT  does  not  fall  within  the  range  of  the  present  work, 
still  less  within  the  power  of  its  author,  to  discuss  at 
any  length  the  fundamental  principles  of  biological 
science.  The  object  of  our  Grammar  has  been  to 
investigate  the  radical  concepts  of  physics,  the  basis  of 
that  "  dead  "  mechanism  to  which  science  is  popularly 
supposed  to  reduce  the  universe.  In  the  course  of  this 
investigation  we  have  had  occasion  to  call  in  question 
several  of  the  notions  commonly  associated  with  these 
physical  concepts  ;  we  have  seen  that  in  speaking  of 
matter  and  force  much  of  our  current  language 
requires  to  be  remodelled  for  scientific  purposes 
Now  physics  is  a  much  older  branch  of  science  than 
biology,  and  biologists  have  been  so  wont  to  look  with 
something  of  awe  and  a  little  of  envy  to  the  presumed 
exactness  both  in  language  and  in  conclusions  of 
mechanical  science,  that  it  may  come  with  rather  a 
shock  to  them  when  they  hear  that  physics,  like 
biology,  is  solely  a  description  and  not  a  fundamental 
explanation.  While  on  the  one  hand,  however,  phy- 
sicists can  get  on  very  well  without  biology,  at  any 
rate  within  a  certain  limited  field  of  observation, 
biologists,  on  the  other,  have  not  only  adopted  many  of 
the  physicist's  notions  as  to  matter,  force^  and  eternity, 


LIFE.  389 

as  modes  of  describing  biological  facts,  but  they  are 
further,  whether  they  wish  it  or  not,  inevitably  bound 
to  physics  by  the  fact  that  life  is  never  found  apart 
from  physical  associations.  Mechanism,  on  its  side 
does  not  as  a  theory  involve  a  discussion  of  biological 
phenomena,  but  biology  without  a  discussion  of 
mechanism  is  necessarily  incomplete.1 

"  The  elements  of  living  matter  are  identical  with 
those  of  mineral  bodies  ;  and  the  fundamental  laws  of 
matter  and  motion  apply  as  much  to  living  matter  as 
to  mineral  matter  ;  but  every  living  body  is,  as  it 
were,  a  complicated  piece  of  mechanism  which  'goes,' 
or  lives  only  under  certain  conditions." 

So  wrote  Professor  Huxley  in  1880. 

The  use  of  physical  terms  abound-  in  biology, 
often,  I  fear,  with  scarcely  accurate  definition.  Nageli 
talks  of  the  "  known  forces  of  the  organism,  heredity 
and  variability " ;  Weismann  speaks  of  the  impossi- 
bility of  the  egg  being  "  controlled  by  two  forces  of 
different  kinds  in  the  same  manner  as  it  would  have 
been  by  one  of  them  alone "  ;  he  further  talks  of 
"  forces  residing  in  the  organism "  influencing  the 
germ-plasm,  which  imperceptible  entity  he  halves 
and  divides  as  if  it  were  a  physical  quantity.2  Lan- 
kester  speaks  of  "  that  first  protoplasm  which  was 

1  From  the  author's  standpoint,  of  course,  conceptions  as  representing 
the  products  of  the  perceptive  faculty  are  largely  conditioned  by  the 
perceptive  faculty  of  an  individual  genus,  man  (pp.  99-104,  211),  and 
therefore  their  nature  may  be  ultimately  elucidated  by  biological,  in 
particular  pyschological,  inquiry. 

2  If  Spencer  can  be  included  in  the  list  of  biologists,  it  will  be  found  that 
he  uses  force  without  special  definition  in  the  following  senses:  (i.)  As 
cause  of  change  in  motion  ;  (ii. )  as  a  biological  process  ;  (iii.)  as  a  name 
for  kinetic  energy;    (iv.)  as  a  name  for  potential  energy;    (v.)  as  a 
general  name  for  physical  sense-impressions,  such  as  light  and  heat,  &c. 


390  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE 

the  result  of  a  long  and  gradual  evolution  of  chemical 
structure  and  the  starting-point  of  the  development 
of  organic  form."  Biologists  lay  the  greatest  weight 
on  the  "  chemical  structure  "  of  protoplasm  and  the 
chemical  processes  which  are  or  accompany  physio- 
logical functions,  while  free  use  is  made  of  such  terms 
as  "  unit-mass  of  living  matter,"  "  resultant  of  organic 
forces,"  "molecular  stimuli,"  "continuity  of  organic 
substance,"  "conditions  of  tension  and  movement," 
"  physical  constitution  necessary  for  immortality,"  &c., 
&c.  Now  either  these  terms  are  used  figuratively,  in 
which  case  we  ought  to  find  them  re-defined,  or  else 
biologists  have  adopted  them  from  physics  and  intend 
to  use  them  in  the  sense  of  the  latter  science. 

But  there  is  small  doubt  that  the  latter  alternative 
represents  the  true  state  of  the  case.  The  biologist 
considers  his  organic  matter  to  be  inexorably  united 
to  the  "  matter "  of  the  physicist,  and  he  uses,  or 
considers  he  uses,  such  terms  as  matter,  force,  me- 
chanism, &c,  in  the  sense  of  the  sister  science.  This 
dependence  of  biology  on  physics  is  so  well  brought 
out  in  the  following  passage  that  the  reader  must 
pardon  our  quoting  it  at  this  stage  of  our  investiga- 
tions : — 

Experience  cannot  help  us  to  decide  this  question  ;  we  do  not  know 
whether  spontaneous  generation  was  the  commencement  of  life  on  the 
earth,  nor  have  we  any  direct  evidence  for  the  idea  that  the  process  of 
development  of  the  living  world  carries  the  end  within  itself,  or  for  the 
converse  idea  that  the  end  can  only  be  brought  about  by  means  of  some 
external  force.  I  admit  that  spontaneous  generation,  in  spite  of  ail 
vain  efforts  to  demonstrate  it,  remains  for  me  a  logical  necessity.  We 
cannot  regard  organic  and  inorganic  matter  as  independent  of  each 
other  and  both  eternal,  for  organic  matter  is  continually  passing  without 
residuum,  into  the  inorganic.  If  the  eternal  and  indestructible  are 
alone  without  beginning,  then  the  non-eternal  and  destructible  must 
have  had  a  beginning.  But  the  organic  world  is  certainly  not  eternal 


LIFE.  391 

and  indestructible  in  that  absolute  sense  in  which  we  apply  these  terms 
to  matter  itself.  We  can,  indeed,  kill  all  organic  beings  and  thus 
render  them  inorganic  at  will.  But  these  changes  are  not  the  same  as 
those  which  we  induce  in  a  piece  of  chalk  by  pouring  sulphuric  acid 
upon  it ;  in  this  case  we  only  change  the  form,  and  the  inorganic 
matter  remains.  But  when  we  pour  sulphuric  acid  upon  a  worm,  or 
when  we  burn  an  oak-tree,  these  organisms  are  not  changed  into  some 
other  animal  and  tree,  but  they  disappear  entirely  as  organized  beings 
and  are  resolved  into  inorganic  elements.  But  that  which  can  be  com- 
pletely resolved  into  inorganic  matter  must  have  also  arisen  from  it,  and 
must  owe  its  ultimate  foundation  to  it.  The  organic  might  be  con- 
sidered eternal  if  we  could  only  destroy  its  form,  but  not  its  nature. 
It  therefore  follows  that  the  organic  world  must  once  have  arisen,  and 
further,  that  it  will  some  time  come  to  an  end.1 

Now  this  passage  is  extremely  instructive,  for  we 
have  the  notion  of  the  "  eternal  and  indestructible  " 
character  of  inorganic  "  matter  "  used  to  demonstrate 
the  "  logical  necessity "  of  spontaneous  generation. 
The  reader  who  is  in  sympathy  with  the  results  of  our 
discussion  on  "matter"  and  has  recognized:  (i)  that 
"  matter"  as  a  substratum  of  our  sense-impressions  is 
a  metaphysical  dogma,  not  a  scientific  concept  (p.  3 1 1)  ; 
(2)  that  eternity  is  an  idle  phrase  in  the  field  of 
nomena  (pp.  221,  227)  ;  and  (3)  that  indestructibility 
relates  to  certain  groupings  of  sense-impressions  and 
not  to  an  undefinable  something  behind  them  (p.  304), 
will  be  inclined  to  admit  that  the  physicist  is  not 
wholly  free  from  responsibility  for  the  intrusion  of 
metaphysics  into  biology.  The  physicist  is  therefore 
hardly  warranted  in  demanding  that  the  biologist 
shall  accurately  define  his  use  of  such  terms  as  matter 
and  force,  for  the  physicist  himself  is  not  above 
reproach.  At  the  same  time  the  author  is  free  to 
confess  that  the  concepts  of  physics  as  defined,  and 
he  believes  logically  defined,  in  the  present  work 

1  Weismann  :  Essays  on  Heredity,  p.  33.     Oxford,  1889 


392  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

scarcely  lend  themselves  to  the  reasoning  of  the 
above  passage.  Nor  can  he  think  that,  when  physics 
has  impressed  upon  biology  that  force  is  only  a 
certain  measure  of  motion,  and  not  an  explanation  of 
anything  whatever,  biologists  will  be  so  ready  to 
ascribe  the  phenomena  of  life  to  "  forces  residing  in 
the  organism."  It  is  with  the  intention  of  suggesting 
how  the  view  of  mechanism,  discussed  in  this  work, 
can  be  conceived  as  applying  to  life  rather  than  of 
dealing  with  the  fundamental  principles  of  biology, 
that  the  present  chapter  has  been  included  in  our 
volume.  . 

§  2. — Mechanism  and  Life. 

In  previous  chapters  we  have  seen  how  the  phe- 
nomenal world  is  a  world  of  groups  of  sense-impressions 
distinguished  by  the  perceptive  faculty  under  the 
two  modes  of  space  and  time,  or  the  mixed  mode  of 
change.  This  change  or  shifting  of  sense-impressions 
occurs  in  repeated  sequences,  or  what  we  have  charac- 
terized as  routine.  In  the  sense-impression  itself 
there  is  nothing  to  suggest  or  enforce  a  routine,  nor 
have  we  sufficient  grounds  as  yet  to  definitely  attribute 
this  routine  to  the  perceptive  faculty.  It  remains  for 
the  present  the  fundamental  mystery  of  perception, 
but  it  is  the  basis  upon  which  all  scientific  knowledge 
is  built.  Science  is  the  description  in  conceptual 
shorthand  (never  the  explanation)  of  the  routine  of  our 
perceptual  experience.  If  this  be  true,  it  follows  that 
the  task  of  the  biologist  is  to  describe  in  conceptual 
shorthand  (not  to  explain)  the  sequences  of  certain 
classes  of  sense-impressions.  The  problem  of  whether 
life  is  or  is  not  a  mechanism  is  thus  not  a  question  of 
whether  the  same  things,  "  matter  "  and  "  force,"  are  or 
are  not  at  the  back  of  organic  and  inorganic  phenomena 


LIFE.  393 

— of  what  is  at  the  back  of  either  class  of  sense- 
impressions  we  know  absolutely  nothing — but  of 
whether  the  conceptual  shorthand  of  the  physicist, 
his  ideal  world  of  ether,  atom,  and  molecule,  will,  or 
will  not,  also  suffice  to  describe  the  biologist's  percep- 
tions of  life. 

The  mystery  in  the  routine  of  sense-impressions  is 
precisely  the  same  whether  those  sense-impressions 
belong  to  the  class  of  living  or  to  that  of  lifeless 
groups.  Life  as  a  mechanism  would  be  purely  an 
economy  of  thought ;  it  would  provide  the  great 
advantages  which  flow  from  the  use  of  one  instead  of 
two  conceptual  shorthands,  but  it  would  not  "  explain  " 
life  any  more  than  the  law  of  gravitation  explains  the 
elliptic  path  of  a  planet  (p.  160).  As  we  have — to 
speak  paradoxically — no  sense  which  can  reach  any- 
thing behind  sense-impressions,  no  "  metaphysical 
sense"  which  enables  us  to  perceive  that  supposed 
entity  "  matter,"  so  we  have  no  special  sense  which 
enables  us  to  perceive  another  supposed  entity,  "  life." * 
Life  and  lifeless  are  merely  class  names  for  special 
groups  of  sense-impressions.  When,  therefore,  we  assert 
"  matter  "  as  the  substratum  of  one  group  of  sense- 
impressions  and  "  life  "  as  the  substratum  of  another, 
and  "  explain  "  life  by  aid  of  matter  and  its  attribute 
"force,"  we  are  simply,  albeit  often  unconsciously, 
wallowing  in  the  Stygian  creek  of  metaphysic  dogma. 
If  the  biologist  gives  us  an  accurate  account  of  the 
development  of  the  ovum  and  then  remarks  that  the 
changes  are  due  to  "  forces  resident  in  the  egg,"  he 
certainly  cannot  mean  that  the  chemist  and  physicist 
are  capable  of  explaining  what  has  taken  place.  He 

1  The  "  sense  of  consciousness,"  if  so  it  can  be  called,  is  hardly  a 
special  sense  of  life,  for  consciousness  and  life  are  not  equivalent  terms. 


394  THE  GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

probably  considers  that  the  conceptual  shorthand  of 
chemistry  and  physics  would  suffice  to  describe  what 
he  has  himself  described  in  other  language.  If  we 
always  remember  that  the  physicist's  fundamental 
conception  of  change  of  motion  is  that  the  change  of 
motion  of  one  particle  is  associated  with  its  position 
relative  to  other  particles,  and  that  force  is  a  certain 
convenient  measure  of  this  change,  then,  I  think,  we 
shall  be  in  a  safer  position  to  interpret  clearly  the 
numerous  biological  statements  which  involve  an 
appeal  to  the  conception  of  force.  We  must  in  each 
case  ask  what  individual  thing  it  is  which  is  con- 
ceptualized as  moving,  what  is  the  field  with  regard  to 
which  it  is  considered  as  moving,  and  how  its  motion 
is  conceived  to  be  measured.  When  we  have  com- 
pleted this  investigation  then  we  shall  be  better  able 
to  appreciate  the  real  substance  which  lies  beneath 
the  metaphysical  clothing  with  which  biological,  like 
physical,  statements  are  too  often  draped.1 

Admitting,  therefore,  that  our  object  in  biology  is 
identical  with  that  in  physics,  namely,  to  describe  the 
widest  ranges  of  phenomena  in  the  briefest  possible 
formulae  (p.  1 1 6),  we  see  that  the  biologist  cannot  throw 
back  life  for  an  explanation  on  physics.  Whether  he 


1  We  are  told,  for  example,  that  "force  is  always  bound  up  with 
matter,"  that  too  small  an  "amount  of  matter"  may  be  present  to 
exercise  a  "controlling  agency"  over  the  development  of  the  embryo, 
and  when  we  seek  to  associate  this  "amount  of  matter"  with  some 
definite  group  of  sense-impressions  we  find  that  no  perceptual  equivalent 
has  been  found  for  it.  What  the  biologist  is  clearly  striving  to  do  is  to 
form  a  conceptual  model  of  the  embryo  by  aid  of  the  relative  motions 
of  the  parts  of  a  geometrical  or  rather  kinetic  structure  (p.  373),  but  it  is 
difficult  to  reach  his  ideas  beneath  the  metaphysical  language  in  which 
he  projects  matter,  force,  and  germ-plasm  into  real  substrata  of  sense- 
impression  (see  Weismann  :  Essays  en  Heredity,  pp.  226-7). 


LIFE.  395 

can  hope  to  describe  life  in  physical  shorthand  is  a 
point  to  which  we  shall  return  a  little  later.  If  we 
look  upon  biology  as  a  conceptual  description  of 
organic  phenomena,  then  nearly  all  the  statements  we 
have  made  with  regard  to  physics  will  serve  as  canons 
for  determining  the  validity  of  biological  ideas.  In 
particular,  any  biological  concept  will  be  scientifically 
valid  if  it  enables  us  to  briefly  summarize  without 
internal  contradiction  any  range  of  our  perceptual 
experience.  But  the  moment  the  biologist  goes  a 
step  further,  and  asserts  on  the  ground  of  the  validity 
of  his  concept  that  it  is  a  reality  of  the  phenomenal 
world,  although  no  perceptual  equivalent  has  yet  been 
found  for  it,  then  he  at  once  passes  from  the  solid 
ground  of  science  to  the  quicksands  of  metaphysics. 
He  takes  his  stand  with  the  physicist  who  asserts 
the  phenomenal  existence  of  the  concepts  atom  and 
molecule. 

§  3. — Mechanism  and  Metaphysics  in  Theories  of  Heredity. 

I  cannot  bring  home  to  the  reader  the  difficulties 
with  which  the  projection  of  conceptions  into  the 
phenomenal  world  is  attended  better  than  by  briefly 
referring  to  two  well-known  biological  theories  of 
heredity.  Of  the  change  in  those  groups  of  sense- 
impressions  which  the  biologist  sets  himself  to  describe 
there  are  two  prominent  features  which  at  first  sight 
might  seem  to  correspond  to  nomic  and  anomic 
changes  (p.  1 i^,  footnote],  to  routine  and  to  breaches  of 
routine.  These  features  are  the  recurrence  in  our  ex- 
perience of  the  offspring  of  sense-impressions  associated 
with  the  parental  organism,  and  the  occurrence  in  our 
experience  of  the  offspring  of  sense-impressions  not 
associated  with  the  parental  organism.  These  features 


396*  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

are  termed  inheritance  and  variation.  The  apparent 
anomy,  involved  in  variation  is  very  probably  like 
the  anomy  of  the  weather,  a  result  of  our  not  yet 
having  formed  a  sufficiently  wide  or  fundamental  classi- 
fication of  facts.  Be  this  as  it  may,  inheritance  and 
variation  form  the  basis  upon  which  biologists  construct 
the  evolution  of  life.  Theories  which  endeavour  to 
resume  inheritance  and  variation  under  a  single  and 
simple  formula  are  termed  theories  of  heredity,  and 
two  of  the  most  important  of  these  theories  are  due 
respectively  to  Darwin  and  Weismann. 

On  Darwin's  hypothesis  of  pangenesis  every  cell  of 
the  body  throws  off  particles  or  gemmules  which 
collect  in  the  reproductive  cells.  These  gemmules, 
or  "  undeveloped  atoms,"  are  transmitted  by  the  parent 
to  the  offspring,  they  multiply  by  self-division,  they 
may  remain  undeveloped  during  early  life,  or  even 
during  several  generations,  but  when  under  the 
influence  of  suitable  environment  they  do  develop,  they 
become  cells  like  those  from  which  they  were  derived. 
By  aid  of  this  hypothesis  Darwin  was  able  to  resume 
a  great  many  of  the  facts  of  heredity.  Inheritance 
was  simply  the  development  of  the  parental  gemmules 
in  the  offspring ;  variation  could  be  described  partly 
by  a  commingling  of  the  gemmules  of  two  parents, 
partly  by  a  modification  of  the  gemmules  of  the 
parental  cells  due  to  their  use  or  disuse.1  Now  it  is 
quite  clear  that  no  biologist  would  have  propounded 
this  hypothesis,  but  for  the  currency  of  corpuscular 
theories  in  physics.  Indeed,  Weismann  actually  re- 
states Darwin's  hypothesis  in  terms  of  molecules, 
and  speaks  of  unknown  forces  drawing  these  molecules 

1  Variation  of  Animals  and  Plants  under  Domestication,  vol.  ii. 
chap,  xxviii. 


LIFE.  397 

to  the  reproductive  cells  and  marshalling  them  there.1 
But  as  no  physicist  ever  caught  an  atom,  so  no  biolo- 
gist ever  caught  an  "undeveloped  atom,"  or  gemmule. 
The  validity  of  the  conception  can  only  be  tested  by 
the  power  it  gives  us  of  resuming  the  facts  of  heredity, 
and  it  is  no  more  disproved  by  the  statement  that 
"  gemmules  have  not  been  found  in  the  blood,"  than 
the  atomic  theory  is  disproved  by  the  fact  that  no 
atoms  have  been  found  in  the  air.  If  the  biologist  has 
once  grasped  that  the  physicist  is  making  a  meta- 
physical statement  when  he  asserts  the  phenomenal 
existence  of  corpuscles,  then  he  will  be  the  more  ready 
to  admit  that  the  non-finding  of  gemmules  and  the 
"  unknown  forces  necessary  to  control  them  "  are  not 
arguments  against  a  conceptual  description  of  heredity, 
but  against  a  metaphysical  projection  of  its  concepts 
into  the  phenomenal  world. 

Weismann,  who  I  think  projects  Darwin's  gemmules 
into  the  phenomenal  world,  and  then  rather  oddly 
states  that  they  compel  us  to  suspend  all  physical 
conceptions,  has,  on  the  other  hand,  shown  good  reason 
for  Darwin's  theory  not  being  valid  as  a  full  description 
of  the  phenomena  of  heredity,  notably  because  the 
transmission  of  acquired  characteristics  receives  sup- 
port from  that  theory,  but  hardly  from  our  perceptual 
experience.  He  has  in  his  turn  endeavoured  to 
formulate  a  theory  which  shall  more  accurately 
describe  the  facts  of  heredity,  especially  those  relating 
to  the  non-transmission  of  characters  acquired  by 
parents,  owing  either  to  use  or  accident  during  their 
lives.  This  theory  is  summed  up  in  the  formula  of 
the  "continuity  of  the  germ-plasm."  According  to 
this  theory  there  exists  a  substance  of  a  definite 

1  Essays  on  Heredity,  pp.  75-8. 


THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

chemical  and  molecular  structure  termed  germ-plasm, 
which  resides  somewhere  in  the  germ-cells,  from  which 
reproduction  takes  place.  In  each  reproduction  a 
part  of  the  germ-plasm  "  contained  in  the  parent  egg- 
cell  is  not  used  up  in  the  construction  of  the  body  of 
the  offspring,  but  is  reserved  unchanged  for  the  for- 
mation of  the  germ-cells  of  the  following  generation." 
This  constitutes  the  continuity  of  the  germ-plasm.1 
Variation  arises  from  the  mixture  of  parental 
germ-plasms  ;  similarity  of  characteristics  in  parent 
and  offspring — inheritance — from  their  both  being 
developed  under  the  control  of  the  same  germ-plasm. 
The  "  immortal  "  part  of  the  organism  which  descends 
from  generation  to  generation  is  the  germ-plasm.2 
Now  this  hypothesis  of  Weismann  as  a  conceptual 
mode  of  describing  our  perceptual  experience  seems  to 
be  of  considerable  value,  but  the  author  weakens  his 
position  throughout  by  projecting  his  conceptions  into 
the  phenomenal  world,  where  up  to  the  present  nothing 
has  been  identified  as  the  perceptual  equivalent  of 
germ-plasm.  It  is  this  transition  from  science  as  a 
conceptual  description  of  the  sequences  of  sense- 
impressions  to  metaphysics  as  a  discussion  of  the 
imperceptible  substrata  of  sense-impressions,  which 
mars  biological  as  well  as  physical  literature.  But 
the  physicist  is  here  to  blame,  for  he  has  projected 
without  perceptual  evidence  his  molecule  and  atom 
into  the  phenomenal  world,  and  the  biologist  only 

1  The  reader  must  be  careful  to  note  that  it  is  not  a  continuity  of  the 
germ-cells,  but  of  a  hitherto  unidentified  substance  contained  in  these 
cells.     Cells,  we  know,  nuclei  we  know,  with  complicated  networks  of 
nucleoli ;  but  what  is  germ-plasm  ?    Not  to  be  seen  and  not  to  be  caught 
by  aniline  stain  or  acetic  acid. 

2  The  Continuity  of  the  Germ-plasm  as  the  Foundation  of  a  Theory  of 
Heredity,  1885.     Essays  on  Heredity,  pp.  165-248. 


LIFE.  399 

follows  the  physicist's  example  when  he  asserts  the 
reality  of  gemmule  or  germ-plasm.  Finding  the 
ground  behind  sense-impressions  already  occupied  by 
molecule  and  atom,  by  matter  and  force,  he  not  un- 
naturally gives  his  metaphysical  products  molecular 
or  atomic  structure  ;  he  endows  them  with  force  and 
"  explains  "  life  by  mechanism.  In  both  the  theories 
of  Darwin  and  Weismann  a  metaphysical  element 
seems  to  enter  owing  to  a  misinterpretation  of  the 
concepts  of  physics.1  Only  when  we  have  fully 
recognized  that  physical  science  is  solely  a  conceptual 
description,  that  matter  as  that  which  moves,  and 
force  as  the  why  of  its  motion  are  meaningless,  will 
this  recognition  begin  to  react  on  the  fundamental 
conceptions  of  biology. 

Our  object  hitherto  has  been  to  suggest  that  if  the 
physicist  withdraws,  as  we  trust  he  may  do,  from  the 
metaphysical  limbo  beyond  sense-impression,  then 
the  biologist  who  has  followed  him  there  will  retreat 
also.  The  problem  as  to  whether  life  is  or  is  not  a 
mechanism  will  then  have  to  be  restated.  We  shall 
then  have  to  ask  whether  organic  and  inorganic 
phenomena  are  capable  of  being  described  by  the 
same  conceptual  shorthand.  In  order  to  understand 
more  clearly  the  exact  nature  of  this  question  we  must 
stay  for  a  moment  to  consider  what  we  mean  when 
we  speak  of  organic  and  inorganic  phenomena.  What 

1  There  are  still  stronger  metaphysical  aspects  in  Weismann's  doctrine. 
That  a  substance  which  possesses  continuity  and  sameness  should  in- 
definitely reproduce  itself,  or  if  it  increases  by  absorption  of  foreign 
substances  should  remain  the  same,  and  this  owing  to  a  definite  molecular 
structure,  can  hardly  be  looked  upon  even  as  a  conceptual  limit  to  any 
perceptual  experience.  We  may  ask,  as  Weismann  does  of  Darwin's 
gemmule,  whether  it  does  not  compel  us  "to  suspend  all  known 
physical  and  physiological  conceptions"  ? 


400  THE  GRAMMAR   OF  SCIENCE. 

groups  of  sense-impressions  do  we  classify  as  living, 
what  groups  as  lifeless  ? 

§  4. —  The  Definition  of  Living  and  Lifeless. 

Now  the  first  point  to  be  noted  is  that  there  is  no 
single  sense-impression  which  can  be  said  to  be  that 
of  life.  We  do,  indeed,  seem  in  our  own  individual 
cases  to  have  in  consciousness  a  direct  sense  of  life. 
But  in  the  first  place  we  have  not  at  present  any  per- 
ception of  consciousness  except  in  our  own  individual 
case  (p.  58),  and  in  the  next  place  we  cannot  even 
infer  that  consciousness  is  associated  with  all  types  of 
life  (p.  69).  We  still  find  it  reasonable  to  speak  of 
human  beings  as  living  when  they  are  asleep,  or  as 
living  when  they  are  completely  paralyzed  ;  we  speak 
of  organisms  as  living  when  there  is  none  of  that 
hesitation  between  immediate  sense-impression  and 
exertion  which  constitutes  thought  and  is  the  essential 
factor  in  human  consciousness  (p.  51).  We  cannot, 
indeed,  say  where  consciousness  must  be  taken  to  cease 
in  the  scale  of  life,  but  it  would  be  ridiculous  to 
question  whether  fungus  spores  had  consciousness  or 
not  as  a  means  of  settling  whether  they  were  to  be 
classified  as  living  or  dead  substance.  The  less  we 
find  exertion  conditioned  by  stored  sense-impresses, 
the  less  degree  of  consciousness  can  we  infer.  The 
lowliest  organisms  appear  to  respond  directly  to  their 
environment,  and  in  this  they  resemble  very  closely 
the  ideal  corpuscle  of  the  physicist,  which  dances  in 
response  to  its  surroundings.  Seeds  which  have 
been  preserved  for  fifty  or  a  hundred  years  with- 
out losing  their  power  of  germination  (see  Appen- 
dix, Note  IV.)  are  organic  substance  and  contain  life, 
at  least  in  a  dormant  form,  yet  it  is  idle  here  to 


LIFE.  401 

postulate   consciousness   as   a   means   of  classifying 
living  and  lifeless  organisms. 

The  moment  we  accept  without  reservation  the 
theory  that  all  life  has  been  evolved  from  some  simple 
organism,  then  we  are  bound  to  recognize  that  con- 
sciousness has  gradually  become  part  of  life,  as  forms 
of  life  grow  more  and  more  complex.  This  does  not 
explain  consciousness,  but  it  is  the  only  consistent 
description  we  can  give  of  its  evolution.  The  corre- 
lation of  thought  and  consciousness  seems  to  indicate 
that  this  complexity  of  the  organism  is  to  be  sought 
in  the  inception  and  development  of  its  capacity 
for  storing  sense-impressions.  We  can  mark  where 
this  storage  fails,  we  can  mark  where  it  exists  ;  but 
where  it  exactly  begins  we  can  hardly  assert. 
This  apparent  continuity  has  led  to  some  rather 
metaphysical  reasoning  on  the  part  of  biologists 
seeking  for  a  distinguishing  characteristic  between 
living  and  lifeless  groups.  As  in  some  types  of  life 
consciousness  may  be  evolved,  it  is  argued  that  there 
must  be  in  life  "  something-which-is-not-yet-conscious- 
ness-but-which-may-develop-into-consciousness,"  and 
to  this  something  Professor  Lloyd  Morgan  has  given 
the  name  of  metakinesis}-  This  metakinesis  does  not 
appear  to  be  more  than  a  metaphysical  name  for  non- 
conscious  life,  for  there  is  no  sense-impression  that  we 
have  of  such  life  that  we  can  describe  as  metakinetic. 
Metakinesis  is  as  intangible  as  the  germ-plasm  of  the 
biologist  or  the  molecule  of  the  physicist,  but  less 
conceptually  valuable  as  it  describes  no  phenomenal 
side  of  life  except  the  fact  that  it  may  or  may  not  be 
associated  with  consciousness.  Those  who  believe 
that  the  organic  has  been  developed  from  inorganic, 

1  See  in  particular  his  letter  to  Nature,  vol.  xliv.  p.  319. 
27 


402  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

that  living  has  proceeded  from  dead  "  matter,"  may 
then  assert  that  there  must  be  in  matter  "  something- 
which-is-not-yet-life-but-which-may-develop-into-life," 
and  may  fitly  term  this  side  of  matter  supermateriality. 
It  is  quite  true  that  we  have  no  direct  series  of  sense- 
impressions  to  which  this  supermateriality  corresponds, 
but  as  we  mark  some  forms  of  matter  associated  with 
life  (just  as  we  mark  some  forms  of  life  associated  with 
consciousness),  so  we  have  the  same  reason  for  postu- 
lating its  existence  as  we  have  in  the  case  of  meta- 
kinesis.  How  metakinesis  develops  from  super- 
materiality  will  of  course  be  the  next  stage  in 
metaphysical  investigation  ! 

Now,  I  hope  that  Professor  Lloyd  Morgan  will 
not  think  I  am  laughing  at  him,  for  this  is  far  from  being 
the  case.  I  believe  that  no  biologist  is  so  patient  with 
the  physicist,  even  when  the  latter  waxes  paradoxical ; 
and  I  recognize  that  to  look  upon  the  mechanical 
and  the  conscious  as  two  aspects  of  one  and  the  same 
process  may  be  a  distinct  simplification  of  our  descrip- 
tion of  life,  and  therefore  scientifically  valid.  But  I 
want  to  point  out,  and  this  very  earnestly,  how  the 
physicist  too  often  entices  the  biologist  into  a  meta- 
physical slough  by  postulating  mechanism  as  the 
substratum  and  not  as  the  conceptual  description  of 
certain  groups  of  sense-impressions.  Had  the  physicist 
asserted  that  the  reality  of  the  external  world  lies  for 
him  in  the  sphere  of  sense-impressions,  and  that  of 
the  beyond  of  sense-impression  physics  knows 
nothing — had  he  said  :  "  What  I  term  mechanism  and 
Professor  Lloyd  Morgan  kinesis  (see  our  p.  355)  is 
purely  a  mode  of  describing  conceptually  the  sequences 
of  my  sense-impressions,"  then  the  door  would  not 
have  been  opened  for  the  metaphysician  to  parody 


LIFE.  403 

metakinesis  by  supermateriality.  So  long  as  the 
biologist  is  taught  to  look  upon  mechanism  as  a  series 
of  imperceptible  motions  undertaken  by  imperceptible 
bodies  under  the  guidance  of  imperceptible  "  mole- 
cular forces,"  he  cannot  be  criticized  for  introducing 
another  imperceptible  element — "  metakinesis  " — into 
this  process.  But  when  the  physicist  ceases  to  postu- 
late any  of  these  imperceptibles  and  boldly  states  that 
mechanism  is  a  conceptual  process,  by  aid  of  which  he 
is  able  to  describe  at  any  rate  certain  phases  in  those 
sequences  of  sense-impressions  which  we  classify  as 
unconscious  life,  then  he  may  fairly  ask  what  sense- 
impressions  of  unconscious  life  the  biologist  classifies 
by  aid  of  metakinesis.  If  the  biologist  replies  it  is 
the  potentiality  of  consciousness,  then  this  is  not  the 
equivalent  of  the  mechanism  of  primitive  forms  of 
life,  The  latter  corresponds  not  only  to  the  poten- 
tiality of  all  the  complex  nervous  system  of  a  con- 
scious organism,  but  it  actually  describes  some  of  our 
perceptual  experience  of  primitive  life.  It  thus  does 
more  than  describe  a  potentiality,  it  describes  a 
reality,  and  thus  cannot  be  classed  like  metakinesis 
with  supermateriality  as  a  metaphysical  "being," 
"  essence,"  or  "  aspect." 

The  biologist  therefore  may  describe  for  us  the 
various  stages  in  the  evolution  of  consciousness, 
reducing  them  to  scientific  formulae  or  laws,  but  he 
cannot  postulate  metakinesis,  still  less  consciousness, 
as  that  which  separates  living  from  lifeless  groups.  All 
types  of  life  do  not  appear  capable  of  developing  into 
conscious  types  ;  and  a  potentiality  not  bearing  any 
outward  "  recognition  marks "  will  not  lead  us  to  a 
definition  of  life  any  more  than  the  potentiality  of 
becoming  a  bishop  would  lead  us  to  a  definition  of  man. 


404  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

§  5.-— 720  the  Laws  of  Motion  apply  to  Life  ? 

If  we  seek  for  the  characteristics  of  life  apart  from 
the  possibility  of  consciousness,  we  can  only  seek  them 
in  some  special  features  of  those  sequences  of  sense- 
impressions  which  we  associate  with  living  organisms. 
Now  we  have  seen  that  groups  of  sense-impressions  are 
all  distinguished  under  the  two  modes  of  space  and 
time,  and  we  are  thus  able  to  conceptualize  all  change 
as  a  motion  of  ideal  corpuscles.  Now  "  currents/' 
"  vibrations  of  filaments,"  "  moving  masses  of  proto- 
plasm," "  contraction/' "  change  of  form,"  "  strain,"  &c., 
&c.,  are  all  terms  in  current  biological  use  adopted  to 
describe  sequences  or  changes  in  sense-impressions.  As 
to  what  are  the  symbolic  bodies  to  which  these  motions 
are  attributed  and  how  they  are  to  be  built  up  from 
the  most  elementary  organic  corpuscles — "  unit-masses 
of  living  matter  "  as  one  biologist  terms  them — there 
appears  to  be  some  diversity  of  opinion.  But  there  is 
practical  agreement  among  biologists  that  the  organic 
corpuscles — the  "physiological  units  "  of  Spencer  or  the 
"  plastidules  "  of  Haeckel — must  be  conceived  as  con- 
structed from  the  atom  and  molecule,  the  inorganic 
corpuscles  of  the  physicist.  Hence,  if  all  we  are  to 
understand  by  mechanism,  is  something  which  we 
conceive  as  being  constructed  of  atom  and  molecule 
and  in  motion,  then  life  can  only  be  conceived  as 
mechanical. 

How,  therefore,  we  must  ask,  is  it  possible  for  us 
to  distinguish  the  living  from  the  lifeless,  if  we  can 
describe  both  conceptually  by  the  motion  of  inorganic 
corpuscles  ?  The  only  answer  that  can  be  given  to 
this  must  be  that  the  nature  of  the  motions  by  which 
we  conceptualize  organic  and  inorganic  phenomena 
are  very  different  We  mean  by  mechanism  some- 


LIFE.  405 

thing  more  than  the  conceptual  description  of  change 
by  aid  of  the  motion  of  physical  corpuscles  ;  we  mean 
that  this  motion  is  itself  summed  up  in  the  laws  of 
motion  discussed  in  the  preceding  chapter.  Herein 
lies  the  apparent  kernel  of  the  problem.  Before  we 
assert  that  life  can  be  described  mechanically,  we  must 
determine  whether  the  motion  by  which  we  concep- 
tualize organic  phenomena  can  be  resumed  in  the 
same  laws  as  the  motion  by  which  we  conceptualize 
inorganic  phenomena. 

But  we  soon  find  that  we  are  only  at  the  beginning 
of  our  investigation.  In  Chapter  VIII.  we  have  seen 
that  the  complex  laws  of  motion  which  hold  for 
particles  of  gross  "matter"  do  not  necessarily  hold 
throughout  the  whole  range  of  physical  corpuscles ; 
they  vary  in  character  and  probably  increase  in  com- 
plexity from  ether-element  up  to  particle.  We  cannot 
therefore,  without  further  consideration,  determine 
what  are  the  laws  of  motion  which  are  to  be  postu- 
lated of  the  organic  corpuscle,  if  life  is  to  be  dealt 
with  as  a  mechanism.  The  laws  which  describe  the 
motion  of  two  groups  of  molecules  are  not  necessarily 
the  same  as  those  which  describe  the  motion  of  two 
isolated  molecules,  or  of  two  atoms.  If  the  laws  by 
aid  of  which  we  might  describe  the  motion  of  ideal 
organic  corpuscles  were  found  to  differ  from  those 
which  describe  the  motion  of  particles  of  heavy 
"  matter,"  it  would  not  settle  the  problem  as  to 
whether  we  could  describe  life  mechanically  or 
not. 

The  atomic  system  by  which  we  conceptualize  even 
the  simplest  unit  of  life  is  far  too  complex  to  allow, 
in  the  present  state  of  mathematical  analysis,  of  any 
synthesis  of  its  motions  in  the  presence  of  other 


406  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

systems  by  which  we  conceptualize  either  living  or 
lifeless  "  matter."  We  cannot  at  present  assert  that 
the  peculiar  atomic  structure  of  the  life-germ  and  its 
environment,  or  field  (p.  342),  would  not  be  sufficient  to 
enable  us  on.  the  basis  of  the  laws  of  atomic  motion 
to  describe  our  perceptual  experience  of  life.  Such 
a  broad  generalization  as  that  of  the  conservation  of 
energy  does  not  appear  to  be  contradicted  by  our  ex- 
perience of  the  action  of  living  organisms  ;  but  then 
the  conservation  of  energy  is  not  the  sole  factor  of 
mechanism,  as  some  fetish-worshippers  nowadays 
imagine  it  to  be. 

For  example,  there  is  the  principle  of  inertia,  the 
statement  that  no  physical  corpuscle  need  be  con- 
ceived as  changing  its  motion  except  in  the  presence 
of  other  corpuscles,  that  there  is  no  need  of  attribut- 
ing to  it  any  power  of  self-determination  (p.  343). 
There  are  probably  those  who  think  some  power  of 
self-determination  must  be  ascribed  to  the  elemen- 
tary organic  corpuscle,  but  this  seems  very  doubtful. 
Placed  in  a  certain  field,  environed  with  other  organic 
or  inorganic  corpuscles,  the  life-germ  moves  relatively 
to  them  in  a  certain  manner,  but  there  seems  no 
reason  to  assert  (indeed  there  are  facts  pointing  in 
the  exactly  opposite  direction)  that  any  change  of 
movement  need  be  postulated  were  the  life-germ 
entirely  removed  from  this  environment.  Indeed  the 
whole  notion  of  self-determination  as  an  attribute  of 
living  organisms  seems  to  have  arisen  from  those  ex- 
tremely complex  systems  of  organic  corpuscles,  where 
the  environment  in  the  form  of  immediate  sense-im- 
pressions determines  change  through  a  chain  of  stored 
sense-impresses  peculiar  to  the  individual  or  self 
(p.  149).  But  if  this  be  self-determination  we  can 


LIFE.  407 

hardly  consider  it  to  have  any  bearing  on  the  simplest 
forms  of  life. 

We  see,  then,  that  biological  change  can  probably 
be  conceptually  described  by  the  change  of  motion  of 
certain  organic  corpuscles  in  the  presence  of  other 
corpuscles,  either  organic  or  inorganic.  The  structure 
of  these  organic  corpuscles  can  further,  to  a  great  ex- 
tent, be  described  in  terms  of  physical  corpuscles.  But 
whether  the  laws  of  this  motion  can  be  deduced  from 
the  laws  of  motion  of  physical  corpuscles  remains  at 
present,  and  may  long  remain,  an  unsolved  problem. 
If  the  one  set  of  laws  could  be  deduced  from  the 
other,  it  would  greatly  simplify  scientific  description, 
but  it  would  not  lessen  the  mystery  of  life.  Those 
who  project  their  conceptions  into  the  phenomenal 
sphere  would  still  be  puzzled  to  know  why  corpuscles 
dance  in  each  other's  presence,  and  the  mystery  would 
be  no  less  or  no  greater  because  a  dance  of  organic 
corpuscles  is  at  bottom  a  dance  of  inorganic  atoms. 
Those  who  treat  all  motion  as  conceptual  (p.  329) 
would  still  have  the  mystery  of  why  sense-impressions 
change  and  change  with  routine  as  insoluble  as  ever. 
Clearly  those  who  say  mechanism  cannot  explain  life 
are  perfectly  correct,  but  then  mechanism  does  not 
explain  anything.  Those,  on  the  other  hand,  who  say 
mechanism  cannot  describe  life  are  going  far  beyond 
what  is  justifiable  in  the  present  state  of  our  know- 
ledge. We  must  content  ourselves  for  the  time  being 
by  saying  that  organic  phenomena  may  be  described 
by  aid  of  organic  corpuscles  constructed  out  of  in- 
organic corpuscles,  and  that  the  organic  corpuscles 
move  in  certain  characteristic  manners,  but  that 
whether  this  motion  follows  or  does  not  follow  laws 
deducible  from  those  dealt  with  in  Chapter  VIII.  we 
have  not  at  present  the  means  of  determining. 


408  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

§  6. — Life  Defined  by  Secondary  Characteristics. 
Thedistinction,therefore,  between  the  inorganic  and 
the  organic  cannot  be  defined  by  saying  that  the  one 
is  mechanical  and  the  other  is  not.  We  are  ultimately 
obliged,  in  order  to  define  life,  to  take  secondary 
characteristics — to  describe  the  structure  by  which 
we  conceptualize  the  organic  corpuscle,  the  motions 
which  are  peculiar  to  it,  and  the  environment  in  which 
alone  we  perceive  life  to  exist.  Thus  we  note  that  its 
atomic  structure  is  based  upon  complex  compounds 
(p.  333)  of  carbon,  hydrogen,  nitrogen,  and  oxygen,  a 
substance  termed  protein  peculiar  to  organic  bodies, 
together  with  water.  The  combination  is  termed 
protoplasm,  but  although  its  chemical  constitution  has 
in  some  measure  been  investigated,  it  has  not  been, 
and  there  at  present  appears  no  probability  of  its 
being,  obtained  except  from  organic  substances. 
Turning  to  the  characteristic  movements  of  life,  we 
note  that  organic  substance  is  conceived  as  growing 
differently  from  inorganic  substance.  When  crystals 
increase  in  size  we  conceive  them  to  set  molecule  to 
molecule,  building  up  from  the  outside.  Organisms, 
on  the  other  hand,  we  suppose  to  grow  by  an  inner 
growth  or  the  addition  of  new  organic  corpuscles  in 
between  and  not  on  the  surface  of  the  old  ones.  Life 
further  undergoes  cyclical  changes  or  movements  in 
which  some  process  of  reproduction  or  division  renews 
the  individual.  Lastly,  a  peculiar  environment,  certain 
conditions  of  moisture  and  temperature  are  necessary 
to  maintain  life.  All  these  characteristics  suffice  to 
mark  off  the  organic  from  the  inorganic,  and  the  dis- 
tinction thus  drawn  appears  to  be  absolutely  rigid.1 

1  These  are  the  distinctions  of  biology  (see,  for  example,  the  article 
Biology  in  the  Encyclopedia  Britannica}.     Of  course  a  physical  state- 


LIFE.  409 

There  is  at  the  present  time,  so  far  as  we  know,  no 
generation  of  living  from  lifeless  substance.  Thus  our 
endeavour  to  define  life  has  led,  through  some  per- 
haps not  unprofitable  byways,  to  the  consideration 
that  the  distinction  between  organic  and  inorganic  is 
not  so  marked  that  we  can  separate  the  one  from 
the  other  by  anything  but  a  lengthy  statement  of 
secondary  characteristics. 

The  axiom  omne  vivum  e  vivo  is  one  which  deserves 
the  reader's  special  attention,  for  it  is  closely  associated 
with  many  important  problems  on  the  borderland 
of  biology  and  physics.  In  the  language  of  this 
Grammar^  living  and  lifeless  are  class  names  for 
certain  groups  of  sense-impressions,  fundamentally 
distinguished  from  each  other  by  requiring  for  their 
conceptual  description  different  atomic  structures  and 
different  types  of  motion.  So  far  as  our  present  ex- 
perience goes  there  is  no  routine  of  sense-impressions 
which,  starting  from  the  lifeless  class,  concludes  with 
the  living  class.  On  the  other  hand  the  converse  tran- 
sition from  the  living  to  the  lifeless  is  an  everyday 
routine.1  We  have  seen  (p.  390)  that  the  latter  fact 
has  been  used  by  Weismann  as  an  argument  in 
favour  of  the  spontaneous  generation  of  life — "that 
which  can  be  completely  resolved  into  inorganic 
matter  must  also  have  arisen  from  it  and  must  owe 
its  ultimate  foundation  to  it,"  he  writes.  This 
passage  seems  to  be  rather  too  dogmatic  and  to 

ment  as  to  the  laws  under  which  organic  corpuscles  are  to  be  conceived 
as  moving  in  each  other's  presence  and  in  that  of  inorganic  corpuscles, 
might,  could  it  be  found,  resume  many  of  these  characteristics  in  a  simple 
formula. 

1  For  example,  in  the  boiling  of  impure  water  or  in  the  pouring  of  acid 
on  vegetable  matter,  but  hardly  in  the  ordinary  "  death  "  of  a  complex 
animal  organism. 


4IO  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

suggest  a  metaphysical  subtratum  to  sense-impres- 
sion which  is  "  completely  resolved."  The  argument 
would  only  be  a  valid  one  if  we  could  assert  that  all 
sequences  of  sense-impressions  are  reversible,  but  this  is 
too  wide  a  statement  to  be  laid  down  unrestrictedly 
in  the  present  state  of  scientific  knowledge.  Physicists 
will  recall  processes  like  the  degradation  of  energy,  of 
which  they  are  unable  to  at  present  conceive  any 
reversion.  It  may  be  that  their  perceptual  experience 
is  not  wide  enough,  and  that  their  geometrical  and 
mechanical  laws  are  only  applicable  to  a  certain 
portion  of  the  universe,  or  it  may  be,  after  all,  that 
sequences  are  irreversible.  Hence  the  spontaneous 
generation  of  life  does  not  follow  as  a  "  logical 
necessity  "  from  the  transition  of  living  into  lifeless 
substance,  at  least  as  long  as  we  cannot  reasonably 
infer  the  reversibility  of  all  sequences  of  sense-impres- 
sions. 

§  7.— The  Origin  of  Life. 

Those  who  accept  the  evolution  of  all  forms  of  life 
from  some  simple  unit,  a  protoplasmic  drop  or  grain— 
and  this  scientific  formula  is  so  powerful  as  a  means 
of  classification  and  description  that  no  rational  mind 
is  likely  to  discard  it — will  hardly  feel  satisfied  to  stop 
at  this  stage.  They  will  demand  some  still  more 
wide-embracing  formula,  which  will  bring  under  one 
statement  their  perceptual  experience  of  both  the 
living  and  the  lifeless.  Here  the  physicist  comes  in 
with  some  very  definite  conclusions.  He  tells  us  that 
in  order  to  classify  his  perceptions  with  regard  to  the 
earth  he  is  compelled  to  postulate  a  period,  distant,  it 
is  true,  many  millions  of  years  back,  in  which,  owing 
to  conditions  of  fluidity  and  temperature,  no  life,  such 
as  we  now  know  life,  not  even  the  protoplasmic  grain, 


LIFE.  41 1 

could  have  existed  on  the  earth.  This  period  has 
been  termed  the  azoic  or  lifeless  period,  but  we  must 
be  careful  to  note  that  we  mean  by  lifeless  only  "  with- 
out life  as  we  now  know  it"  Bearing  these  facts  in 
mind  there  are  three  hypotheses  by  which  we  can  con- 
ceptually describe  and  classify  our  present  experiences 
of  the  living  and  the  lifeless.  They  are  as  follows  : — 

(a)  Life  may  be  conceived  as  based  upon  an  organic 
corpuscle  which  is  immortal — that  is  to  say,  it  will,  with 
suitable  environment,  continue  to  exist  for  ever.    This 
hypothesis  may  be  termed  \h.t  perpetuity  of  life. 

(b)  Life    may  be   conceived  as  generated  from  a 
special  union  of  inorganic    corpuscles,   which   union 
may  take  place  under  favourable  environment.     This 
hypothesis  is  termed  the  spontaneous  generation  of  life.^ 

(c)  Life  may  have  arisen  from  the  "  operation  in  time 
of  some  ultra-scientific  cause."     This  is  the  hypothesis 
of  a  special  creation  of  life. 

We  will  briefly  consider  these  hypotheses  in  succes- 
sion. 

§  8. —  The  Perpetuity  of  Life,  or  Biogenesis. 

The  perpetuity  of  life  at  first  sight  appears  to  con- 
tradict what  physicists  tell  us  of  the  azoic  condition 
of  the  earth.  A  reconciliation  of  the  two  hypotheses 
has,  however,  been  found  by  Von  Helmholtz  and  Sir 
William  Thomson,  who  suggest  that  a  meteorite  like 
an  ethereal  gondola  might  have  brought  in  a  crevice 
the  protoplasmic  drop  to  our  earth  when  the  azoic 
stage  was  passed.  But  our  experience  of  meteorites 
—especially  the  intense  cold  they  are  subjected  to  in 

1  In  more  technical  language  the  hypotheses  (a)  and  (If),  are  spoken 
of  as  biogenesis  and  abiogenesis  respectively.  In  using  the  popular  term 
"  spontaneous  generation  "  I  must  not  be  supposed  to  suggest  that  life 
(any  more  than  consciousness)  can  be  suddenly  generated. 


412  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

space  and  the  intense  heat  they  undergo  in  passing 
through  our  atmosphere,  together  with  the  proba- 
bility that  they  are  fragments  of  azoic  rather  than 
zoic  bodies — does  not  allow  of  much  significance 
being  attributed  to  this  pleasant  conceit.  The 
perpetuity  of  life  seems  to  involve  the  conception  of 
forms  of  life  anterior  to  the  protoplasmic  grain  and 
capable  of  withstanding  an  environment  totally  unlike 
what  protoplasm  as  we  know  it  can  endure.  Now  it 
is  highly  probable  that  protoplasm  itself  must  be  con- 
ceived as  having  had  a  long  development  anterior  to 
any  stage  in  which  we  now  find  it.  These  stages  may 
have  been  eliminated  in  the  struggle  for  existence,  or 
they  may  have  been  peculiar  to  conditions  of  moisture 
and  temperature  which  have  long  passed  away  on  our 
earth.  We  might  indeed  be  forced  to  conceive  them 
as  imperceptible  like  the  atom,  or,  indeed,  as  indis- 
tinguishable from  inorganic  substance,  which  would 
lead  us  remarkably  close  to  the  second  hypothesis  of 
spontaneous  generation. 

This  theory  of  the  perpetuity  of  life,  we  must 
remember,  is  stated  in  purely  conceptual  language. 
As  "  eternity  "  is  a  meaningless  term  in  the  perceptual 
universe  of  physical  phenomena,  so  it  must  be  in  the 
perceptual  universe  of  biological  phenomena.  Time 
is  a  mode  of  distinguishing  our  sense-impressions,  and 
it  extends  only  so  far  as  we  have  sense-impressions 
to  distinguish  (p.  221).  The  perpetuity  of  some 
primitive  life  unit  is  therefore  a  pure  conception  which, 
like  that  of  the  indestructibility  of  the  atom  (p.  304), 
helps  us  to  classify  and  describe  our  perceptual  ex- 
perience, but  for  which  it  is  meaningless  to  assert  any 
phenomenal  reality. 

The  perpetuity   of    life,   however,    involves    some 


LIFE.  413 

rather  extensive  inferences — in  particular,  that  life  in 
its  earliest  protoplasmic  forms  (which  we  must  con- 
ceive to  have  resembled  in  many  respects  existing  pro- 
toplasm), was  yet  capable  of  subsisting  under  a  totally 
unlike  environment,1  an  environment  in  which  only 
what  we  term  inorganic  substances  have  hitherto  been 
perceived  to  exist.  Such  an  hypothesis  must  accord- 
ingly be  less  adequate  than  any  other  which  without 
greater  inference,  brings  under  a  single  formula  our 
perceptual  experience  of  both  the  living  and  the 
lifeless. 

§  9.  —  The  Spontaneous  Generation  of  Life,  or  Abiogenesis. 

Such  a  formula  is  that  of  the  spontaneous  genera- 
tion of  life.  In  the  first  place,  this  formula  involves 
the  conception  of  forms  of  protoplasm  anterior  to 
those  with  which  we  are  at  present  acquainted,  but  it 
does  not  suppose  these  like  forms  to  have  existed  in 
unlike  conditions.  It  postulates  that  if  we  were  to  go 
backwards  the  organic  would  have  disappeared  into 
the  inorganic  before  we  reached  the  azoic  age.  After 
the  azoic  age  the  physical  conditions  must  be  con- 
ceived as  such  that  the  various  chemical  compounds 
were  evolved  which  ultimately  culminated  in  the  first 
protoplasmic  unit.2  But  if  this  be  so,  it  may  be  asked  : 

1  Compare  the  Second  Canon  of  Logical  Inference  (p.  72). 

2  Lankester  (Article  "Protozoa  "),  remarking  on  the  steps  which  brought 
the  earliest  type  of  protoplasm  into  existence,  writes  : — "  A  conceivable 
state  of  things   is  that  a  vast   amount  of  albuminoids  and  other  such 
compounds  had  been  brought  into  existence  by  those  processes  which 
culminated  in  the  development  of  the  first  protoplasm,  and  it  seems 
therefore  likely  enough  that  the  first  protoplasm  fed  upon  these  ante- 
cedent  steps   in  its  own   evolution   just  as  animals  feed  on   organic 
compounds  at  the  present  day,  more  especially  as  the  large  creeping 
plasmodia  of  some  Mycetozoa  feed  on  vegetable  refuse."     These  words 
suffice   to  indicate  the  long  stages  of  development  that  probably   lie 
behind  protoplasm  as  we  know  it. 


4H  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

Why  cannot  we  find  this  sequence  of  sense-impressions 
in  our  present  experience,  why  cannot  we  repeat  the 
spontaneous  generation  of  life  in  our  laboratories? 
The  reply  probably  lies  in  the  statement  that  we 
seek  to  reverse  a  process  which  is  irreversible  (p.  410). 
In  five  or  ten  minutes  we  convert  living  into  lifeless 
substance,  but  there  is  no  reason  for  asserting  that 
the  reverse  process  can  be  gone  through  even  in  the 
lifetime  of  a  man.  On  the  contrary,  it  probably  took 
millions  of  years,  with  complex  and  varying  conditions 
of  temperature,  to  pass  from  the  chemical  substance  of 
life  to  that  complex  structure  which  may  have  been 
the  first  stage  of  organic  being.  Let  us  for  a  moment 
consider  that  there  is  possibly  as  long  an  evolution 
from  the  chemical  substance  to  the  protoplasm  we 
now  know,  as  from  protoplasm  to  conscious  animal 
life.  Let  us  suppose  that  all  the  existing  links 
between  protoplasmic  life,  and  that  of  the  highest 
mammals  had  disappeared,  and  then  let  us  set  the 
biologist  to  demonstrate  in  his  laboratory  the 
spontaneous  generation  of  consciousness  by  experi- 
ments on  protoplasm !  We  cannot  assert  where 
consciousness  begins  or  ends,  but  we  can  trace  back 
in  continuous  series  the  conscious  to  the  unconscious, 
and  it  is  no  argument  against  the  truth  of  the 
hypothesis  that  consciousness  is  spontaneously  gene- 
rated to  say  that  we  cannot  repeat  the  process  at 
our  will.  In  precisely  the  same  manner  spontaneous 
generation  of  life  could  only  be  perceptually  demon- 
strated by  filling  in  the  long  terms  of  a  series  between 
the  complex  forms  of  inorganic  and  the  simplest 
forms  of  organic  substance.  Were  this  done,  it  is 
quite  possible  that  we  should  be  unable  to  say  (es- 
pecially considering  the  vagueness  of  our  definitions 


LIFE.  415 

of  life)  where  life  began  or  ended.  The  failure  to 
reproduce  the  spontaneous  generation  of  life  in  a 
laboratory  has  thrown  some  discredit  on  the  hypo- 
thesis ;  but  we  ought  to  wonder  that  any  one  should 
have  hoped  for  an  experimental  demonstration  of 
such  an  hypothesis  rather  than  be  surprised  at  its 
absence.  At  the  very  best,  physicists  will  have  to 
give  us  far  more  definite  information  than  we  have  at 
present,  both  with  regard  to  the  physical  changes  at 
the  close  of  the  azoic  period,  and  with  regard  not  only 
to  the  chemical  constitution  but  the  physical  structure 
of  protoplasm,  before  it  would  be  advisable  even  to 
think  of  further  experiments  on  the  spontaneous 
generation  of  life. 

Even  in  the  face  of  laboratory  failure  this  second 
hypothesis  seems  far  more  satisfactory  than  that  of 
the  perpetuity  of  life.  For  in  the  latter  case  we  carry 
back  life  through  a  continuous  evolution  to  a  stage 
where  change  seems  to  cease  and  we  are  left  with  a 
primordial  life-germ  and  no  antecedent  state.  Yet 
our  whole  perception  of  the  phenomenal  universe  is 
continuous  change.  It  cannot  be  said  that  this  prim- 
ordial germ  is  comparable  with  the  physicist's  prime- 
atom.  The  latter  is  a  pure  concept  by  aid  of  which 
the  physicist  constructs  his  symbols  for  phenomenal 
bodies,  but  he  does  not  assert  that  these  bodies  have 
been  evolved  from  prime-atoms.  Bodies,  he  considers, 
may  at  any  time  be  formed  by  aggregates  of  atoms,  or 
again  dissolved,  but  he  does  not  postulate  that  the 
whole  physical  universe  was  ever  in  such  a  condition 
that  it  would  have  to  be  conceived  of  as  resolved  into 
simple  disaggregated  prime-atoms.  Indeed  it  is  clear 
if  he  did  so,  that  the  primordial  life-germ,  if  anything 
akin  to  protoplasm,  would  be  non-extant,  and  the 


4l6  THE   GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

perpetuity  of  life  be  contrary  to  physical  theory.  In 
order  to  compare  at  all  the  primordial  germ  with  the 
atom,  we  ought  to  take  the  former  as  the  basis  of  the 
most  complex  extant  organisms  and  suppose  that  on 
their  dissolution  they  were  resolved  again  into  germs. 
But  this  would  practically  involve  the  indestructibility 
of  the  unit  of  life — an  hypothesis  which  appears  to  be 
at  once  confuted  by  our  perceptual  experience.  The 
physical  history  of  the  universe  does  not  lead  us  back 
to  an  evolution  from  a  prime-atom  and  then  stop  at 
that  point.  The  hypothesis  of  the  perpetuity  of  life 
does  lead  us  back  to  a  primordial  germ  and  then  stop 
there.  What  is  more,  this  germ  appears  placed  in 
surroundings  where  it  is  destructible,  while  no  environ- 
ment, so  far  as  our  experience  goes,  need  be  conceived 
to  have  this  effect  on  the  atom.  The  two  hypotheses, 
of  the  perpetuity  of  life  and  of  the  indestructibility  of 
the  atom,  are  therefore,  if  superficially  alike,  in  reality 
far  from  comparable.  It  is  an  inference  from  the 
like  to  the  unlike  when  we  assert  an  evolution  up  to 
the  primordial  germ,  and  then  a  cessation  of  that 
evolution.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  no  argument 
against  spontaneous  generation  to  assert  that  it,  in  its 
turn,  leads  us  back  to  the  prime-atom,  at  which  we 
must  again  stop.  For  this  is  not  the  fact.  It  only 
leads  us  back  to  bodies  conceptually  constituted  of 
prime-atoms,  but  which  in  physical  evolution  may  be 
continually  passing  from  one  condition  of  aggregation 
to  another.  On  the  hypothesis  of  spontaneous  gene- 
ration we  must  conceive  life  as  reappearing  and  again 
disappearing  when  and  wherever  the  physical  condi- 
tions are  suitable.  The  hypothesis  does  not  in  the 
least  explain  the  appearance  of  life  ;  it  merely  formu- 
lates its  appearance  as  a  routine  on  the  occurrence 


LIFE.  417 

of  certain  phenomena.  Whenever  a  planet  passing 
through  the  azoic  stage  begins  to  consolidate  and 
cool,  then  begins  the  chemical  evolution  which  ends 
in  the  first  stage  of  life ;  but  why  this  succession  of 
stages  takes  place  is  no  more  a  subject  of  knowledge 
than  why  the  sun  rises  daily.  As  we  describe  the 
latter  so  we  could  describe  the  former,  were  we  capable 
of  closely  watching  for  millions  of  years  the  physical 
history  of  a  planet. 

§   10. —  The  Origin  of  Life  in  an  "ultra-scientific"  Cause. 

As  to  the  hypothesis  of  a  "  special  creation,"  science 
could  not  accept  it  as  a  contribution  to  knowledge 
had  it  even  been  able  to  cross-examine  the  only 
witness  to  the  proceeding.  The  object  of  science  is 
to  classify  and  resume  in  brief  formulae  the  phases  of 
our  perceptual  experience.  It  has  to  knit  together 
all  our  sense-impressions  by  conceptual  links,  and 
thus  to  enable  us  to  take  a  wide  survey  of  the  universe 
with  the  least  possible  expenditure  of  thought.  Since 
time  is  a  mode  under  which  we  perceive  things,  we 
cannot  accurately  assert  of  the  earth  that  such  and 
such  changes  occurred  "  between  one  and  two  hundred 
million  years  ago."  What  we  really  mean  is  this  : 
that  in  order  to  resume  and  classify  our  perceptual 
experience  of  the  earth,  we  form  a  conceptual 
model  of  it,  and  such  a  model  we  conceive  to  have 
passed  through  certain  changes  one  or  two  hundred 
million  years  ago  in  absolute  time  (p.  226).  Such  a 
statement  is  ultimately  involved  in  the  formulae  by 
which  we  resume  our  immediate  sense-impressions, 
and  its  scientific  validity  does  not  depend  upon  its 
describing  something  .  which  took  place  beyond  the 

28 


41 8  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

sphere  of  our  perceptions,  but  upon  its  flowing  from 
laws  which  accurately  describe  the  whole  of  our 
present  perceptual  experience  in  the  same  field.  Now 
the  hypothesis  of  a  "  special  creation  "  cannot  be 
accepted  as  part  of  a  conceptual  model  of  the  uni- 
verse ;  it  cannot  serve — like  the  formula  of  evolution 
for  example — as  a  means  of  linking  together  phases  of 
our  perceptual  experience :  it  would  not  bring  unity 
into  the  phenomena  of  life  nor  enable  us  to  economize 
thought.  Had  the  universe  been  created,  just  as  it  is, 
yesterday,  the  scientific  mind  would  describe  and 
classify  its  immediate  sense-impressions  and  its  stored 
sense-impresses  far  better  by  aid  of  the  theory  of 
evolution  than  by  aid  of  a  "special  creation,"  and  in 
this  sense  science  cannot  accept  the  hypothesis  of  a 
special  creation  as  any  contribution  to  knowledge  at 
all.  Knowledge  is  the  description  in  conceptual 
shorthand  of  the  various  phases  of  our  perceptual 
experience,  and  the  very  statement  of  the  hypothesis 
— as  "  the  operation  in  time  of  some  ultra-scientific 
cause  MI — shows  us  that  we  have  gone  beyond  know- 
ledge, and  are  metaphysically  separating  time  from 
perception  and  projecting  causation  beyond  the  sphere 
of  sense-impression  (p.  186). 

The  history  of  human  thought  shows  us  that  at 
whatever  stage  men's  power  of  describing  the  sequence 
of  phenomena  fails,  that  is,  wherever  their  knowledge 
ends  and  their  ignorance  begins,  there,  to  fill  the 
place  of  the  unknown  antecedent,  they  call  in  a 
"  special  creation  "  or  an  "  ultra-scientific  cause."  To 
the  untrained  minds  of  earlier  ages  this  cloak  to 

1  This  form  of  the  statement  is  due  to  Sir  G.  G.  Stokes  :  On  the 
Beneficial  Effects  of  Light,  p.  85.  (Third  Course  of  Burnett  Lectures.) 
London,  1887. 


LIFE.  419 

ignorance  seemed  natural  enough,  but  in  a  scientific 
age  it  is  only  an  excuse  for  intellectual  inertia;  it 
shows  that  we  have  given  up  trying  to  know,  where 
to  strive  to  know  is  the  first  duty  of  science.  For 
many  centuries  a  seven  days'  creation  of  the  world 
sufficed  to  screen  our  ignorance  of  the  physical 
history  of  the  earth,  and  of  organic  evolution,  or  the 
origin  of  species.  On  these  points  science  is  now 
perfectly  definite,  but  it  has  had  a  hard  struggle  to 
get  rid  of  the  obstacles  across  the  path  of  knowledge. 
The  slight  plantation  by  which  mythology  sought  to 
screen  human  ignorance  had  become  a  forest,  the 
special  preserve  of  a  caste,  which  it  was  sacrilege  to 
hew  down.  Whether  the  battle  will  be  now  transferred 
to  a  "  special  creation  "  of  the  ultimate  element  of  life 
remains  to  be  seen,  but  in  saying  that  science  is  at 
present  ignorant  as  to  the  ultimate  origin  of  life,  we 
must  be  careful  to  allow  no  metaphysical  hypothesis 
of  an  "  ultra-scientific  cause  "  to  take  root.  We  trust 
that  light  will  come  to  science  here,  as  it  has  come  in 
equally  difficult  problems  in  the  past  ;  and  not  im- 
possibly this  light  will  come  in  the  direction  of  the 
spontaneous  generation  of  life.  It  is  not  before  or 
behind  in  the  sequence  of  cause  and  effect  that  we 
must  insert  the  supernatural  full  stop.  There  is  no 
need  to  cloak  ignorance  at  distant  stages  with 
mystery  ;  the  mystery  lies  at  hand  in  every  change  of 
sense-impression,  in  the  fact  that  knowledge  is  at  all 
times  a  description,  but  never  an  explanation  of  that 
change.  The  spontaneous  generations  of  life  and  of 
consciousness  are  not  conceptions  which  reduce  the 
mystery  of  being  ;  they  but  knit  more  closely  together 
the  veil  of  sense-impressions  which  bounds  the  field 
of  knowledge  and  enshrouds  the  fundamental 


42O  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

mysteries  of  why  we   perceive   at  all    and    why  we 
perceive  by  routine. 

§  ii. — On  the  Relation  of  the  Conceptual   Description    to   the 
Phenomenal  World. 

The  reader  will  have  noticed  that  the  standpoint 
which  the  author  of  this  volume  has  reached  through 
an  analysis  of  physical  conceptions  is  largely  con- 
firmed when  we  turn  to  biological  science. 
Hypotheses  of  heredity,  of  the  generation  of  life,  and 
of  the  origin  of  consciousness,  are  clearly  formulae 
which  attempt  to  describe  the  routine  of  our  percep- 


Past - 

FIG.  25. 

tual  experience ;  and  they  do  this  by  aid  of  a 
conceptual  model  which  not  only  resumes  our  present 
perceptions,  but  enables  us  to  carry  back  into  the 
past,  or  forward  into  the  future,  the  sequence  of  scientific 
causation  (p.  153).  That  the  conceptual  model  and  our 
perceptual  experience  agree  at  all  points  where  we 
can  compare  them,  forms  the  sole  basis  of  our  assertion 
that  the  model  can  be  used  to  describe  the  non- 
perceptible  past  and  future.  If  two  curves  were  to  be 
in  contact  along  the  whole  of  that  portion  of  the  arc 
which  we  were  capable  of  examining,  it  would  be 
valid  to  replace  one  curve  by  the  other  ;  and  to  calcu- 


LIFE.  42 1 

late  the  probability  that  the  curves  would  continue  to 
touch,  would  be  to  measure  the  belief  we  ought  to  put 
in  our  scientific  predictions  as  to  the  future  (p.  177). 
The  capacity  of  the  conceptual  curve  for  representing 
the  phenomenal  curve  within  the  sphere  of  our 
perceptions  would  not  be  in  the  least  invalidated,  if 
the  phenomenal  curve  came  to  a  full  stop  beyond  the 
sphere  of  perception.1 

It  is  only  when  the  symbols  of  our  conceptual 
description  are  treated  as  the  substrata  of  perception, 
or  converted  into  what  may  truly  be  described  as 
"  ultra-scientific  causes  "  of  the  routine  of  phenomena, 
it  is  only  when  the  scientist  becomes  metaphysical, 
that  difficulty  arises.  In  biology  this  projection  seems 
invariably  to  occur  through  the  channel  of  physics  ; 
the  biologist  looks  to  force,  chemical  constitution, 
molecular  structure,  for  an  explanation,  where  at  best 
they  can  merely  provide  conceptual  shorthand  for 
descriptive  purposes.  It  seems  all  the  more  necessary 
to  emphasize  and  repeat  this  important  distinction, 
because  the  failure  to  grasp  it  has  been  made  the 
ground  for  what  is  really  a  metaphysical  attack  on  the 
Darwinian  theory  of  evolution.  As  I  interpret  that 
theory  it  is  truly  scientific,  for  the  very  reason  that  it 
does  not  attempt  to  explain  anything.  It  takes  the 
facts  of  life  as  we  perceive  them,  and  attempts  to 
describe  them  in  a  brief  formula  involving  such  con- 
ceptions as  "variation,"  "  inheritance,"  "natural 
selection,"  and  "  sexual  selection."  But  no  more  than 


1  The  analogy  to  the  laws  of  science  may  be  still  better  brought 
home,  at  least  to  the  mathematician,  by  supposing  the  equation  to  the 
conceptual  curve  known,  but  not  that  to  the  fragment  of  a  curve  AB 
(Fig.  25).  The  points  A  and  B  would  not  lend  themselves  to  scientific 
description,  they  would  fall  outside  the  field  of  knowledge. 


422  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

the  law  of  gravitation  explains  our  routine  of  percep- 
tions with  regard  to  the  sun,  does  Darwin's  theory 
of  the  origin  of  species  explain  our  perceptions 
of  change  in  living  forms.  Perhaps  some  of  the 
modern  critics  of  Darwin  will  be  less  ready  to  con- 
sider adaptations  as  "  not  explicable "  by  natural 
selection,  but  due  to  the  "  precise  chemical  nature  of 
protoplasmic  metabolism,"  or  to  "  an  internal  fate, 
expressible  in  terms  of  dominant  chemical  constitu- 
tion," if  they  once  grasp  that  physics  and  chemistry 
in  their  turn  render  nothing  "  explicable,"  but  merely, 
like  natural  selection  itself,  are  shorthand  descriptions 
of  changes  in  our  sense-impressions. 

§  12. — Natural  Selection  in  the  Inorganic  World. 

There  is  a  problem,  however,  with  regard  to  natural 
selection  which  deserves  special  attention  from  both 
physicist  and  biologist,  namely :  Within  what  limits 
is  the  Darwinian  formula  a  valid  description  ?  As- 
suming the  spontaneous  generation  of  life  as  a 
plausible,  if  yet  unproven,  hypothesis,  where  are  we  to 
consider  that  selection  as  a  result  of  the  struggle  for 
existence  began  ?  Again,  for  what,  if  any,  forms  of 
life  are  we  to  consider  it  as  ceasing  to  be  an  essential 
factor  in  descriptive  history  ?  We  may  not  be  able 
to  answer  these  questions  definitely,  but  some  few 
words  at  least  must  be  said  with  regard  to  their 
purport. 

In  the  first  place  we  notice  that  as  soon  as  we  con- 
ceive a  perfectly  gradual  and  continuous  change  from 
inorganic  to  organic  substance,  then  we  must  either 
call  upon  the  physicist  to  admit  that  natural  selection 
applies  to  inorganic  substances,  or  else  we  must  seek 
from  the  biologist  a  description  of  how  it  came  to  be  a 


LIFE.  423 

factor  in  organic  evolution.  Now  there  are  two  elements 
in  natural  selection — environment, which  may  be  either 
organic  or  inorganic,  and  death,  as  a  process  of 
eliminating  those  less  fitted  to  this  environment.  In 
the  case  of  purely  inorganic  substances  we  can  con- 
ceive that,  under  the  physical  conditions  which  follow 
the  azoic  period  of  a  planet,  all  sorts  of  chemical 
products  with  varying  physical  structures  might 
appear.  Scientifically  we  might  describe  these  pro- 
ducts as  the  complex  dances  of  corpuscular  groups. 
In  the  meeting  of  group  and  group  some  groups 
would  retain  their  individuality,  others  would  lose  it 
or  be  dissolved  and  possibly  re-combined  in  new  forms. 
Any  group  which  retained  its  individuality  would 
be  spoken  of  physically  as  a  stable  product;  and  in 
the  early  history  of  a  planet,  although  we  are  far 
from  being  able  to  describe  accurately  what  might 
actually  take  place,  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  suppose 
that  a  physical  selection  of  stable  and  destruction  of 
unstable  products  might  go  on.  We  do  not  know 
why  one  element  is  more  stable  than  a  second,  why  it 
is  better  suited  to  its  environment  (we  might  describe 
the  stability  by  aid  of  atomic  accelerations,  but  this 
would  not  explain^  only  resume  it)  ;  we  can  only 
suggest  a  selection  of  certain  compounds  which, 
because  they  are  selected,  we  describe  as  more  stable. 
Now  this  selection  of  stable  compounds  is  a  very 
possible  feature  of  physical  evolution,1  but  it  must  be 
noted  that  it  is  not  precisely  the  same  as  natural 
selection.  The  environment  is  in  this  case  purely 

1  It  has  been  applied  with  remarkable  power  by  Crookes  (British 
Association  Address,  Section  B,  l8<S6),  to  give  a  suggestive  sketch  of 
how  even  the  chemical  elements  might  be  conceived  as  evolved  from 
protyle  or  prime-atoms. 


424  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

inorganic,  and  "death"  corresponds  to  the  dissolution 
and  ultimate  re-absorption  into  more  stable  com- 
pounds. The  competing  substances  form,  indeed, 
their  own  environment ;  and  it  is  the  special  structure, 
not  the  corpuscle,  which  is  conceived  to  disappear 
in  the  struggle.  This  physical  selection  is  possibly 
what  led  up  to  the  complex  chemical  substances 
endowed  with  special  molecular  structure,  the 
hypothetical  albuminoids  in  which  some  biologists 
suggest  that  life  originated. 

We  are,  then,  face  to  face  with  the  problem  of  how 
far  this  physical  selection  continued  to  act  on  the 
evolution  of  the  earliest  organic  substances.  How  far 
was  it  the  chief  factor  in  the  processes  which  we  con- 
ceive as  modelling  both  the  chemical  constitution  and 
the  physical  structure  of  the  earliest  life-germs?  The 
first  organic  corpuscles  must  have  been  so  close  to  the 
inorganic,  and  must  have  had  an  environment  so  essen- 
tially inorganic  and  not  organic,  that  the  test  of  relative 
physical  stability  must  surely  have  been  more 
important  than  the  competition  of  superabundant 
organisms  of  varying  types  with  each  other.  To  those 
who  have  accustomed  themselves  to  look  upon 
organic  substance  as  essentially  differing  from 
inorganic  only  by  complexity  of  chemical  and 
physical  structure,  the  notions  of  organic  and  in- 
organic environment,  of  the  elimination  of  the  unfit 
and  the  destruction  of  less  stable  compounds — in  short, 
the  notions  of  biological  and  physical  selection  — shade 
insensibly  one  into  the  other.  Selection  will  be  phy- 
sical when  the  environment  is  more  inorganic  than 
organic,  and  biological  or  natural  in  the  converse  case. 
But  those  naturalists  who  postulate  a  special  organic 
corpuscle  are  certainly  called  upon  to  decide  how  and 


LIFE.  425 

when  the  formula  of  natural  selection  begins  to 
govern  its  evolution,  and  what  part,  if  any,  physical 
selection  has  played  in  the  determination  of  its 
chemical  and  physical  constitution. 

§  13. — Natural  Selection  and  the  History  of  Man. 

Passing  to  the  superior  limit  we  have  next  to  ask, 
How  far  are  the  principles  of  natural  selection  to  be 
applied  to  the  historical  evolution  of  man  ?  To  judge 
by  the  author's  experience  of  historical  literature,  we 
should  have  to  say  that  up  till  very  recent  times 
historians  have  assumed  that  the  historical  develop- 
ment of  man  cannot  be  briefly  resumed  in  wide- 
reaching  formulae  ;  that  history  is  all  facts  and  no 
factors.  That  natural  history,  the  evolution  of 
organic  nature,  is  at  the  basis  of  human  history  is  the 
unwavering  belief  of  the  present  writer.  History  can 
never  become  science,  can  never  be  aught  but  a 
catalogue  of  facts  rehearsed  in  more  or  less  pleasing 
language,  until  these  facts  are  seen  to  fall  into 
sequences  which  can  be  briefly  resumed  in  scientific 
formulae.  These  formulae  can  hardly  be  other  than 
those  which  so  effectually  describe  the  relations  of 
organic  to  organic  and  of  organic  to  inorganic  pheno- 
mena in  the  earlier  phases  of  their  development.  The 
growth  of  national  and  social  life  can  give  us  the  most 
wonderful  insight  into  natural  selection,  and  the  elimi- 
nation of  the  unstable  on  the  widest  and  most  impressive 
scale.1  Only  when  history  is  interpreted  in  this  sense  of 
natural  history  does  it  pass  from  the  sphere  of  nar- 

1  This  view  is  far  from  being  held  by  the  majority  of  sociologists  and 
historians.  One  example  typical  of  many  may  be  cited  here  :  "  Every 
phase  of  the  history  of  the  development  of  organisms,  which  Darwin 
brings  forward  as  an  hypothesis,  remains,  in  any  case,  quite  unsuited  for 


426  THE  GRAMMAR   OF  SCIENCE. 

rative  and  become  science.  But,  on  the  other  hand, 
in  this  sense  of  a  description  of  facts  resumed  in  brief 
formulae,  all  science  is  history.  It  may  take  a  long 
training  in  scientific  modes  of  thought  before  the 
literary  historian  is  converted,  but  his  conversion 
must  come  sooner  or  later  in  an  age  when  the  reading 
public  is  becoming  more  and  more  imbued  with  the 
scientific  spirit.1 

comparison  with  the  constantly  and  uniformly  progressive  and  never- 
resting  history  of  the  human  race." — Dr.  Georg  Mayr  :  Die  Gesetz- 
massigkeit  im  Gescllschaftslebcn. 

1  The  present  confusion  of  thought  on  this  subject  cannot  bt 
illustrated  better  than  by  referring  to  a  recent  work  and  the  remarks 
upon  it  of  a  well-known  critic.  Dr.  E.  Westermarck  has  lately 
published  a  book  entitled  :  The  History  of  Human  Marriage 
(Macmillan,  1891).  The  introduction  to  this  work  states  in  clear  and 
fairly  accurate  language  the  scientific  method  of  historical  investigation, 
but  when  we  come  to  the  material  of  the  book  we  find  a  singular 
absence  of  scientific  method.  There  is  a  great  collection  of  facts  under 
different  headings  from  every  quarter  of  the  globe,  but  it  does  not  seem  to 
have  struck  the  writer  that  to  find  sequences  of  facts— a  growth  or 
evolution  expressible  by  a  scientific  law — we  must  follow  the  changes  of 
one  tribe  or  people  at  a  time.  We  cannot  trace  the  successive  stages  of 
social  life  except  by  the  minute  investigation  of  facts  relating  to  one 
social  unit,  which  may,  and  indeed  must,  be  afterwards  compared  with 
like  investigations  for  other  units.  We  have,  then,  in  Dr.  Westermarck 
an  excellent  example  of  good  theory  and  bad  practice. 

In  his  critic,  Professor  Robertson  Smith  (Nature,  vol.  xliv.  p.  270), 
we  have  a  writer  who  has  done  unsurpassed  work  in  the  natural  history 
of  religions  and  of  marriage.  Yet  this  critic  is  so  unconscious  of  the 
character  of  his  own  work  that  he  considers  Dr.  Westermarck  confuses 
"  history  "  and  "natural  history"!  "The  history  of  an  institution," 
he  writes,  "which  is  controlled  by  public  opinion  and  regulated  by  law 
is  not  natural  history.  The  true  history  of  marriage  begins  where  the 
natural  history  of  pairing  ends."  And  again  :  "  To  treat  these  topics 
[polyandry,  kinship  through  female  only,  infanticide,  exogamy]  as 
essentially  a  part  of  the  natural  history  of  pairing  involves  a  tacit 
assumption  that  the  laws  of  society  are  at  bottom  mere  formulated 
instincts  ;  and  this  assumption  really  underlies  all  our  author's  theories. 
His  fundamental  position  compels  him,  if  he  will  be  consistent  with 


LIFE.  427 

It  is  peculiarly  in  "  prehistoric  history "  that  we 
are  for  the  time  being  best  able  to  apply  the  scientific 
method.  That  the  earliest  history  of  each  individual 
people  follows  general  laws  of  human  development 
which  are  capable  of  accurate  scientific  statement  is 
a  view  which  is  being  daily  confirmed  by  the  dis- 
coveries of  comparative  anthropology,  folklore,  and 
mythology.  It  is  true  that  the  application  of  these 
laws  varies  to  a  certain  extent  with  the  physical 
environment,  with  the  climate  and  geographical  sur- 
roundings. Nevertheless,  in  broad  outline  the 
development  of  man,  whether  in  Europe,  Africa,  or 
Australasia,  has  followed  the  same  course.  The 
divergencies  from  this  uniformity  of  development 
appear  indeed  to  be  less  the  farther  we  penetrate 
into  the  nascent  history  of  the  human  race.  This 
uniformity  is  to  some  degree  of  course  only  apparent 
and  must  be  attributed  to  the  obscurity  in  which  all 
early  history  is  involved.  Yet  it  is  for  the  greater 
part  real,  and  due  to  the  fact  that  in  the  early  stages 
of  civilization  the  physical  environment  and  the  more 
animal  instincts  of  mankind  are  the  dominating 
factors  of  evolution. 

Primitive  history  is  not  a  history  of  individual  men, 
nor  of  individual  nations  in  the  modern  sense  ;  it  is 
a  description  of  the  growth  of  a  typical  social  group 
of  human  beings  under  the  influences  of  a  definite 

himself,  to  hold  that  every  institution  connected  with  marriage  that  has 
universal  validity,  or  forms  an  integral  part  of  the  main  line  of  develop- 
ment, is  rooted  in  instinct,  and  that  institutions  which  are  not  based 
on  instinct  are  necessarily  exceptional  and  unimportant  for  scientific 
history."  When  a  really  scientific  historian  can  in  a  scientific  journal 
reject  an  unscientifically  executed  investigation  because  it  starts  from 
an  unexceptional  scientific  theory,  we  are  truly  in  topsy-turvydom. 
Science  has  yet  to  do  a  pioneer's  work  in  the  field  of  historical  method. 


428  THE   GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

physical  environment,  and  of  characteristic  physio- 
logical instincts.  Food,  sex,  geographical  position, 
are  the  facts  with  which  the  scientific  historian  has  to 
deal.  These  influences  are  just  as  strongly  at  work 
in  more  fully  civilized  societies,  but  their  action  is 
more  difficult  to  trace,  and  is  frequently  obscured  by 
the  temporary  action  of  individual  men  and  individual 
groups.  The  obscurity  only  disappears  when  we  deal 
with  average  results,  long  periods,  and  large  areas. 
The  savage  who  fights  with  his  neighbour  in  order  tG 
kill  and  eat  him,  is  an  obvious  example  of  the  struggle 
for  existence.  The  contest  of  modern  nations  for 
markets  in  Africa  and  Asia,  their  strife  for  the  posses- 
sion of  trade  routes,  their  attempts  to  cheapen  their 
manufactures,  and  to  better  educate  their  artizans, 
may  in  reality  be  described  by  the  same  laws  of 
evolution,  but  the  manifestation  of  these  laws  is  far 
more  complex  and  difficult  to  analyze.  This  rivalry 
is  at  bottom  the  struggle  for  existence,  which  is 
still  moulding  the  growth  of  nations  ;  but  history,  as 
it  is  now  written,  conceals,  under  the  formal  cloak  of 
dynasties,  wars,  and  foreign  policies,  those  physical 
and  physiological  principles  by  which  science  will 
ultimately  resume  human  growth. 

§  14. — Primitive  History  describable  in  terms  of  the  Principles 
of  Evolution. 

The  economical  condition  of  any  nation  during  a 
given  period  is  closely  associated  with  its  rate  of 
reproductivity  and  with  its  indirect  struggle  against 
its  neighbours  for  land  and  food.  Not  less  important 
for  the  stability  of  any  nation  is  the  nature  of  the 
prevailing  forms  of  ownership,  marriage,  and  family 
life.  But  the  continual  variations  in  these  forms  are 


LIFE.  429 

in  modern  history  usually  hidden  under  problems  of 
trade  and  exchange,  under  civil  laws  as  to  ownership, 
inheritance,  marriage  and  divorce,  or  under  statistics 
of  pauperism,  emigration,  and  sexual  morality.  The 
old  factors  of  evolution  are  there,  but  they  are  dis- 
guised. It  is  only  when  we  turn  to  a  less  complex 
stage  of  social  growth  that  we  fully  grasp  the  direct 
bearing  which  the  struggle  for  food  and  for  the  grati- 
fication of  the  sexual  instincts  has  had  in  moulding 
human  development.  It  is  this  struggle  which  is  the 
fundamental  formula  for  the  description  of  all  existing 
systems  of  ownership  and  of  marriage  in  its  widest 
sense.  In  ownership  and  marriage  are  further  rooted 
the  laws  and  institutions  of  competing  modern  states. 
Sexual  instinct  and  the  struggle  for  food  have  both 
separated  and  combined  individual  men  ;  in  them  we 
find  the  basis  of  both  the  egoistic  and  the  altruistic 
instincts,  of  both  individualism  and  socialism  in  the 
most  fundamental  sense  of  these  terms. 

Systems  of  ownership  and  marriage  have  indeed 
been  modified  by  climate  and  geographical  sur- 
roundings, but,  speaking  generally,  they  have  passed 
through  much  the  same  development,  it  may  be  at 
very  different  periods,  in  all  quarters  of  the  world. 
Fragments  of  the  primitive  history  of  one  society  can 
often  be  linked  together  by  our  knowledge  of  another 
society  still  existing  in  a  backward  stage  of  civiliza- 
tion. The  like  sequences  in  the  stages  of  social  growth 
exhibited  by  most  primitive  societies  undoubtedly 
arise  from  similarity  in  their  general  physical  environ- 
ment and  from  the  sameness  of  the  characteristic 
physiological  instincts  in  man,  which  everywhere 
centre  in  the  satisfaction  of  hunger  and  in  the 
gratification  of  the  sexual  appetite.  Diverse  as  at 


43O  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

first  sight  ownership  and  marriage  may  seem,  they 
will  yet  be  found  on  nearer  investigation  to  be  closely 
associated.  Broadly  speaking,  each  particular  mode 
of  ownership  has  been  accompanied  by  a  particular 
form  of  marriage.  These  two  social  institutions  have 
acted  and  reacted  upon  each  other  and  their  changes 
have  been  nearly  simultaneous.  Ownership,  inheri- 
tance, common  rights,  are  essentially  connected  with  the 
structure  of  the  family,  and  therefore  with  the  nature 
of  the  sexual  tie.  Thus  it  comes  about  that  primitive 
history  must  be  based  upon  a  scientific  investigation 
into  the  growth  and  correlation  of  the  early  forms  of 
ownership  and  marriage.  It  is  only  by  such  an 
investigation  that  we  are  able  to  show  that  the  two 
great  factors  of  evolution,  the  struggle  for  food  and 
the  instinct  of  sex,  will  suffice  to  resume  the  stages  of 
social  development.  When  we  have  learned  to  describe 
the  sequences  of  primitive  history  in  terms  of  physical 
and  biological  formulae,  then  we  shall  hesitate  less  to 
dig  deep  down  into  our  modern  civilization  and  find 
its  roots  in  the  same  appetites  and  instincts  (see 
Appendix,  Note  VI.\  We  shall  then  be  less  unwilling 
to  admit  that  historical  science,  like  any  other  branch 
of  science,  cannot  only  describe  the  past  but  is  capable 
of  predicting  the  future  course  of  development.  Here, 
in  predicting  from  the  economic  and  social  history  of 
the  past  the  probable  tendencies  of  the  immediate 
future,  seems  to  be  the  true  function  of  those  somewhat 
errant  sciences,  political  economy  and  sociology. 

§  15. — Morality  and  Natural  Selection. 
Although  the  reader  may  be  prepared  to  admit  that 
the  "survival  of  the  fittest "  is  a  formula  describing 
the  development  of  mankind  even  at  the  present,  he 


LIFE.  431 

may  still  question  how  it  can  possibly  be  a  source  of 
altruistic  conduct  in  life.1  If  perpetual  struggle  for 
existence  between  all  forms  of  life  be  the  keynote  to 
progress — if  the  individual,  stronger  in  body  or  mind, 
does  invariably  push  aside  his  weaker  fellows,  render 
them  subservient  to  his  aims,  or  crush  them  out  of 
existence,  how  can  we  look  upon  life  from  any  but  the 
egoistic  and  pessimistic  standpoint  ?  Poverty  and 
disease  must  then  be  regarded  as  valuable  aids  in 
the  destruction  of  less  fit  human  beings,  wealth  and 
luxury  as  the  meet  reward  of  individual  fitness. 
Starting  with  this  view  of  life  as  solely  a  war  of 
individuals,  we  inevitably  reach  that  conception  of 
government  which  may  be  summed  up  in  the  sen- 
tences :  A  maximum  of  good  must  arise  from  a 
minimum  of  social  organization  ;  for  government  to 
interfere  between  individuals  is  an  irrational  attempt 
to  upset  the  principle  of  the  survival  of  the  fittest. 

The  reader  must  not  think  that  I  am  exaggerating 
the  pessimism  of  some  of  our  modern  biologists. 
Here,  in  a  few  words,  are  the  views  of  Haeckel : — 

"  Darwinism  is  anything  but  socialistic.  If  a  definite  political 
tendency  be  attributed  to  this  English  theory — which  is,  indeed,  possible 
— this  tendency  can  only  be  aristocratic,  certainly  not  democratic,  and 
least  of  all  socialistic.  The  theory  of  selection  teaches  us  that  in 
human  life,  exactly  as  in  animal  and  plant  life,  at  each  place  and  time 
only  a  small  privileged  minority  can  continue  to  exist  and  flourish  ;  the 
great  mass  must  starve  and  more  or  less  prematurely  perish  in  misery. 
Innumerable  are  the  germs  of  every  form  of  animal  and  plant  life,  and 
the  young  individuals,  which  spring  from  these  germs.  The  number  of 
fortunate  individuals,  on  the  other  hand,  who  develop  to  their  full  age 
and  actually  attain  their  goal  in  life  is  out  of  all  proportion  small.  The 
cruel  and  relentless  struggle  for  existence  which  rages  throughout  all 


1  The  substance  of  the  remainder  of  this  chapter  is  taken  from  a 
lecture  delivered  in  1888,  and  afterwards  published  as  a  pamphlet. 


432  THE   GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

living  Nature,  and  in  accordance  with  Nature  must  rage,  this  ceaseless 
and  pitiless  competition  of  all  living  things,  is  an  undeniable  fact ;  only  the 
select  minority  of  the  privileged  fit  is  in  a  position  to  successfully  survive 
this  competition,  the  great  majority  of  competitors  must  meanwhile  of 
necessity  perish  miserably  !  We  may  deeply  mourn  this  tragic  fact,  but 
we  cannot  deny  or  alter  it.  '  Many  are  called  but  few  are  chosen  !  ' 
This  selection,  this  picking  out  of  the  chosen  is  necessarily  combined 
with  the  languishing  and  perishing  of  the  remaining  majority.  Another 
English  investigator  even  denotes  the  kernel  of  Darwinism  as  '  the 
survival  of  the  fittest,'  the  '  triumph  of  the  best.'  Obviously  the  principle 
of  selection  is  anything  but  democratic,  it  is  aristocratic  in  the  precise 
sense  of  the  word."1 

Spencer  and  Huxley  have  taught  much  the  same 
gospel.  Yet,  if  the  creed  of  science  be  based  on  this 
law  of  evolution,  how  can  it  inculcate  aught  but 
pessimism  for  the  weak,  how  can  it  ever  be  the  faith 
of  any  but  the  privileged  few  ?  I  venture  to  think 
that  the  view  of  the  survival  of  the  fittest  propounded 
by  Haeckel  is  in  reality  a  very  insufficient  analysis, 
and  that  it  requires  much  qualifying  statement. 

The  struggle  for  existence  involves  not  only  the 
struggle  of  individual  man  against  individual  man, 
but  also  the  struggle  of  individual  society  against 
individual  society,  as  well  as  the  struggle  of  the 
totality  of  humanity  with  its  organic  and  inorganic 
environment.  To  include  these  omitted  factors,  might 
at  first  sight  appear  only  to  enlarge  the  battle-field,  to 
extend  the  chaos  of  opposing  interests.  But  in  reality 
it  alters  the  whole  aspect  of  life.  The  interest  the 
individual  has  in  developing  to  the  utmost  his  own 
powers  is  a  very  important  factor  of  change — let  us  call 
it  Individualism.  But  the  interest  individual  societies 
have  in  developing  their  resources,  in  organizing  them- 
selves owing  to  the  intense  struggle  which  is  ever 

1  Freie  Wissenschaft  itnd  freie  Lehre,  S.  73. 


LIFE.  433 

waging  between  society  and  society,  this  is  an  equally 
important  factor  of  evolution  and  one  too  often 
forgotten  when  the  doctrines  of  Darwin  are  applied 
to  human  history.  Individual  societies  have  the 
strongest  interest  in  educating,  training,  and  organizing 
the  powers  of  all  their  individual  members,  for  these 
are  the  sole  conditions  under  which  a  society  can 
survive  in  the  battle  for  life.  This  tendency  to  social 
organization,  always  prominent  in  progressive  com- 
munities, may  be  termed,  in  the  best  and  widest  sense 
of  the  word,  Socialism.  The  socialistic  as  much  as 
the  individualistic  tendency  is  a  direct  outcome  of  the 
fundamental  principle  of  evolution.  Finally,  there  is 
a  third  factor  of  evolution,  namely,  the  profit  that 
arises  to  humanity  at  large  from  common  organization 
against  organic  and  inorganic  foes.  The  interdepen- 
dence of  mankind  throughout  the  world  is  becoming 
a  more  and  more  clearly  recognized  fact.  The  failure 
of  human  beings  in  one  part  of  the  world  to  master 
their  physical  environment  may  lead  to  a  famine  at 
their  antipodes ;  the  triumph  of  the  scientists  of  one 
nation  over  a  minute  bacillus,  is  a  victory  for  all 
humanity.  The  development  of  human  control  over 
man's  physical  and  biological  environment  in  all  parts 
of  the  world  is  thus  of  real  importance  to  each  indi- 
vidual group.  This  solidarity  of  humanity  in  the 
struggle  with  its  environment  is  no  less  a  feature  than 
Individualism  or  Socialism  of  the  law  of  evolution. 
We  may  perhaps  term  it  Humanism. 

If  our  analysis  has  been  a  correct  one  it  has  led  us 
from  the  simple  law  of  the  survival  of  the  fittest  to 
three  great  factors — Individualism,  Socialism,  and 
Humanism — tending  to  modify  human  life.  Our  strong 
inherited  instincts  to  Individualism,  to  Socialism,  and 

29 


434  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

in  a  less  extent,  to  Humanism,1  guide  us  to  those 
principles  of  conduct,  duty  to  self,  duty  to  society,  and 
duty  to  humanity,  which  our  forefathers  were  taught 
to  think  of  as  the  outcome  of  supersensuous  decrees  or 
of  divine  dispensations,  and  which  some  even  of  their 
children  still  regard  as  due  to  mysterious  tendencies 
to  righteousness,  or  to  some  moral  purpose  in  the 
universe  at  large. 

§  16. — Individualism,  Socialism,  and  Humanism. 
We  may  fitly  conclude  this  chapter  on  Life  by  a 
few  remarks  on  the  extent  to  which  Individualism, 
Socialism,  and  Humanism  respectively  describe  the 
features  of  human  development.  The  great  part 
played  in  life  by  the  self-asserting  instinct  of  the 
individual  does  not  need  much  emphasizing  at  the 
present  time.  It  has  been  for  long  the  over-shrill 
keynote  of  much  of  English  thought.  All  forms  of 
progress,  some  of  our  writers  have  asserted,  could  be 
expressed  in  terms  of  the  individualistic  tendency. 
The  one-sided  emphasis  which  our  moralists  and 
publicists  placed  upon  individualism  at  a  time  when 
the  revolution  of  industry  relieved  us  from  the  stress 
of  foreign  competition,  may  indeed  have  gone  some 
way  towards  relaxing  that  strict  training  by  which  a 
hard-pressed  society  supplements  the  inherited  social 
instinct.  This  emphasis  of  individualism  has  un- 
doubtedly led  to  great  advances  in  knowledge  and 
even  in  the  standards  of  comfort.  Self-help,  thrift, 

1  A  good  deal  of  the  humanistic  instinct  as  developed  in  modern 
times  is  practically  a  product  of  socialism.  As  the  tribal  recognition- 
marks  grew  feebler  and  localization  less  definite,  the  social  sympathies 
were  extended  to  the  stranger  whose  habits  and  modes  of  thought 
were  not  too  widely  divergent  from  those  of  the  society  in  which  he 
found  himself. 


LIFE.  435 

personal  physique,  ingenuity,  intellect,  and  even 
cunning  have  been  first  extolled  and  then  endowed 
with  the  most  splendid  rewards  of  wealth,  influence, 
and  popular  admiration.  The  chief  motor  of  modern 
life  with  all  its  really  great  achievements  has  been 
sought — and  perhaps  not  unreasonably  sought — in  the 
individualistic  instinct.  The  success  of  individual 
effort  in  the  fields  of  knowledge  and  invention  has 
led  some  of  our  foremost  biologists  to  see  in  indi- 
vidualism the  sole  factor  of  evolution,  and  they  have 
accordingly  propounded  a  social  policy  which  would 
place  us  in  the  position  of  the  farmer  who  spends  all 
his  energies  in  producing  prize  specimens  of  fat  cattle, 
forgetting  that  his  object  should  be  to  improve  his 
stock  all  round.1 

I  fancy  science  will  ultimately  balance  the  indi- 
vidualistic and  socialistic  tendencies  in  evolution 
better  than  Haeckel  and  Spencer  seem  to  have  done, 
The  power  of  the  individualistic  formula  to  describe 
human  growth  has  been  overrated,  and  the  evolutionary 
origin  of  the  socialistic  instinct  has  been  too  frequently 
overlooked.2  In  the  face  of  the  severe  struggle, 
physical  and  commercial,  the  fight  for  land,  for  food, 
and  for  mineral  wealth  between  existing  nations,  we 
have  every  need  to  strengthen  by  training  the  partially 
dormant  socialistic  spirit,  if  we  as  a  nation  are  to  be 
among  the  surviving  fit.  The  importance  of  organizing 
society,  of  making  the  individual  subservient  to  the 
whole,  grows  with  the  intensity  of  the  struggle.  We 

1  R.  H.  Newton  :  Social  Studies,  p.  365. 

2  It  may  be  rash  to  prophesy,  but  the  socialistic  and  individualistic 
tendencies  seem  the  only  clear  and  reasonable  lines  upon  which  parlia- 
mentary parties  will  be  able  in  the  future  to  differentiate  themselves. 
The  due  balance  of  these  tendencies  seems  the  essential  condition  for 
healthy  social  development. 


436  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

shall  need  all  our  clearness  of  vision,  all  our  reasoned 
insight  into  human  growth  and  social  efficiency  in 
order  to  discipline  the  powers  of  labour,  to  train  and 
educate  the  powers  of  mind.  This  organization  and 
this  education  must  largely  proceed  from  the  state,  for 
it  is  in  the  battle  of  society  with  society,  rather  than 
of  individual  with  individual,  that  these  weapons  are 
of  service.  Here  it  is  that  science  relentlessly  pro- 
claims :  A  nation  needs  not  only  a  few  prize  indi- 
viduals ;  it  needs  a  finely  regulated  social  system — of 
which  the  members  as  a  whole  respond  to  each 
external  stress  by  organized  reaction — if  it  is  to 
survive  in  the  struggle  for  existence. 

If  the  individual  asks :  Why  should  I  act  socially? 
there  is,  indeed,  no  argument  by  which  it  can  be 
shown  that  it  is  always  to  his  own  profit  or  pleasure 
to  do  so.  Whether  an  individual  takes  pleasure  in 
social  action  or  not  will  depend  upon  his  character 
(pp.  57,  150) — that  product  of  inherited  instincts  and 
past  experience — and  the  extent  to  which  the  "tribal 
conscience  "  has  been  developed  by  early  training.  If 
the  struggle  for  existence  has  not  led  to  the  domi- 
nant portion  of  a  given  community  having  strong 
social  instincts,  then  that  community,  if  not  already 
in  a  decadent  condition,  is  wanting  in  the  chief 
element  of  permanent  stability.  Where  this  element 
exists,  there  society  will  itself  repress  those  whose 
conduct  is  anti-social  and  develop  by  training  the 
social  instincts  of  its  younger  members.  Herein  lies 
the  only  method  in  which  a  strong  and  efficient 
society,  capable  of  holding  its  own  in  the  struggle  for 
life,  can  be  built  up.  It  is  the  prevalence  of  social 
instinct  in  the  dominant  portion  of  a  given  com- 
munity which  is  the  sole  and  yet  perfectly  efficient 


LIFE.  437 

sanction  to  the  observance  of  social,  that  is  moral, 
lines  of  conduct. 

Besides  the  individualistic  and  socialistic  factors 
of  evolution  there  remains  what  we  have  termed  the 
humanistic  factor.  Like  the  socialistic  it  has  been 
occasionally  overlooked,  but  at  the  same  time 
occasionally  overrated,  as  for  example,  in  the  formal 
statements  of  Positivism.  We  have  always  to  re- 
member that,  hidden  beneath  diplomacy,  trade, 
adventure,  there  is  a  struggle  raging  between  modern 
nations,  which  is  none  the  less  real  if  it  does  not  take 
the  form  of  open  warfare.  The  individualistic  instinct 
may  be  as  strong  or  stronger  than  the  socialistic, 
but  the  latter  is  always  far  stronger  than  any  feeling 
towards  humanity  as  a  whole.  Indeed  the  "  solidarity 
of  humanity,"  so  far  as  it  is  real,  is  felt  to  exist  rather 
between  civilized  men  of  European  race  in  the  pre- 
sence of  nature  and  of  human  barbarism,  than  between 
all  men  on  all  occasions.1 

"  The  whole  earth  is  mine,  and  no  one  shall  rob  me 
of  any  corner  of  it,"  is  the  cry  of  civilized  man.  No 
nation  can  go  its  own  way  and  deprive  the  rest  of 
mankind  of  its  soil  and  its  mineral  wealth,  its  labour- 
power,  and  its  culture — no  nation  can  refuse  to 
develop  its  mental  or  physical  resources — without 
detriment  to  civilization  at  large  in  its  struggle  with 
organic  and  inorganic  nature.  It  is  not  a  matter  of 
indifference  to  other  nations  that  the  intellect  of  any 
people  should  lie  fallow,  or  that  any  folk  should  not 
take  its  part  in  the  labour  of  research.  It  cannot  be 
indifferent  to  mankind  as  a  whole  whether  the 

1  The  feeling  of  European  to  Red  Indian  is  hardly  the  same  as  that  of 
European  to  European.  The  philosopher  may  tell  us  it  "  ought "  to  be, 
but  the  fact  that  it  is  not  is  the  important  element  in  history. 


438  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

occupants  of  a  country  leave  its  fields  untilled,  and  its 
natural  resources  undeveloped.  It  is  a  false  view  of 
human  solidarity,  a  weak  humanitarian  ism,  not  a  true 
humanism,  which  regrets  that  a  capable  and  stalwart 
race  of  white  men  should  replace  a  dark-skinned  tribe 
which  can  neither  utilize  its  land  for  the  full  benefit 
of  mankind,  nor  contribute  its  quota  to  the  common 
stock  of  human  knowledge.1  The  struggle  of  civilized 
man  against  uncivilized  man  and  against  nature 
produces  a  certain  partial  "  solidarity  of  humanity  " 
which  involves  a  prohibition  against  any  indivi- 
dual community  wasting  the  resources  of  man- 
kind. 

The  development  of  the  individual,  a  product  of 
the  struggle  of  man  against  man,  is  seen  to  be  con- 
trolled by  the  organization  of  the  social  unit,  a  product 
of  the  struggle  of  society  against  society.  The 
development  of  the  individual  society  is  again 
influenced,  if  to  a  less  extent,  by  the  instinct  of  a 
human  solidarity  in  civilized  mankind,  a  product  of 
the  struggle  of  civilization  against  barbarism  and 
against  inorganic  and  organic  nature.  The  principle 
of  the  survival  of  the  fittest,  describing  by  aid  of  the 
three  factors  of  individualism,  socialism,  and  humanism 
the  continual  struggle  of  individuals,  of  societies  of 
civilization  and  barbarism,  is  from  the  standpoint  of 
science  the  sole  account  we  can  give  of  the  origin  of 
those  purely  human  faculties  of  healthy  activity,  of 


1  This  sentence  must  not  be  taken  to  justify  a  brutalizing  destruction  ' 
of  human  life.  The  anti-social  effects  of  such  a  mode  of  accelerating 
the  survival  of  the  fittest  may  go  far  to  destroy  the  preponderating 
fitness  of  the  survivor.  At  the  same  time,  there  is  cause  for  human 
satisfaction  in  the  replacement  of  the  aborigines  throughout  America 
and  Australia  by  white  races  of  far  higher  civilization. 


LIFE.  439 

sympathy,  of  love,  and   of  social  action  which  men 
value  as  their  chief  heritage. 

SUMMARY. 

I.  Owing  to  the  metaphysical  character  of  the  language  of  much  of 
modern  physics,  metaphysics  has  found  a  foothold  in  biology.  Peculiarly 
in  the  idea  of  life  as  a  mechanism  do  we  find  confusion  reigning.  The 
problem  ought  to  be  expressed  in  words  to  the  following  effect :  Can  we 
describe  the  changes  in  organic  phenomena  by  the  same  conceptual 
shorthand  of  motion  as  suffices  to  describe  inorganic  phenomena  ? 
There  is  difficulty  in  answering  this  question  because  we  are  unable  to 
assert  what  are  the  exact  laws  of  motion  which  would  apply  to  the 
complex  physical  structure  by  which  we  conceptualize  the  simplest 
organic  germ. 

2.  The  distinction  between  living  and  lifeless  is  not  capable  of  brief 
definition,  consciousness  and  self-determination  give  us  no  assistance, 
and   we  are  thrown  back  on  special  characteristics  of  structure  and 
motion. 

3.  Of  the  three  hypotheses  which  have  been  invented  to  describe  the 
origin  of  life — its  perpetuity,  spontaneous  generation,  and  origin  from 
an   "ultra-scientific  cause" — the  second  seems  the    most    valuable. 
Like  the    "  spontaneous  generation   of  consciousness,"   it  is  only  a 
conceptual  description,  and  not  an  explanation  of  the  sequence  of 
phenomena. 

4.  Biologists  are  called  upon  to  define  the  limits  within  which  they 
suppose  the  formula  of  natural  selection  to  be  a  valid  description  :  in 
particular,  how  it  is  related  to  that  physical  selection  of  more  stable 
inorganic   compounds   which  we  may  conceive  to  have  taken    place 
during  and  after  the  azoic  period.      At  the  'other  end  of  the  scale  we 
have   again   to  ask  how  far  the   survival  of  the  fittest  describes   the 
sequences   of  human   history.     While  it  seems   probable  that  human 
history  may  be  resumed  in  the  brief  formuke  of  biology  and  physics, 
still   several   leading   biologists  who  have  examined  human  progress 
from   this   standpoint   do   not   appear   to   have  paid  sufficient  regard 
to  the  socialistic  instinct,  which,  as  much  as  the  individualistic  instinct, 
is  a  factor  of  the  principle  ol  evolution. 


LITERATURE. 

GLAUS  and  SEDGWICK. — Elementary  Text-Book  of  Zoology  (General 
Part,  Chapter  I.).     London,  1884. 


440  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

HAECKEL,  E. — Natiirliche  Schopfungs-Geschichte  (Zwolfter  Vortrag, 
S.  250-310),  4th  ed.  Berlin,  1873.  (History  of  Creation,  revised 
by  Ray  Lankester,  London,  1883.) — On  the  Development  of  Life. 
Particles  and  the  Perigenesis  of  the  Plastidule,  1875  (pp.  211-57 
of  The  Pedigree  of  Man  and  Other  Essays,  London,  1883). — Freie 
Wissenschaft  und  freie  Lehre.  Stuttgart,  1878.  (Freedom  of 
Science  and  Teaching,  with  Note  by  Huxley.  London,  1879.) 

HUXLEY,  T.  H. — On  our  Knowledge  of  the  Causes  of  the  Phenomena  of 
Organic  Nature.  London,  1863. — Lay  Sermons,  Addresses,  and 
Reviews.  (On  the  Physical  Basis  of  Life,  pp.  132-61).  London, 
1870. — Nineteenth  Century,  vol.  xxiii.  (The  Struggle  for  Exis- 
tence). 

SANDERSON,  J.  S.  BURDON.  —  Opening  Address  to  the  British 
Association,  1889,  Nature,  vol.  xl.  p.  521. 

SPENCER,  II. — Principles  of  Biology,  vol.  i.  (to  be  read  with  caution). 

London,  1864.      The  Man  versus  the  State,  London,  1890. 
See  also  the  articles  in  The  Encyclopaedia  Britannica  on  "  Biology," 

"Physiology"   (Parti.,  General  View),  and  "Protoplasm,"  and  those 

in   the  new  edition  of  Chambers's  Encyclopcedia  on   "Abiogenesis," 

"Biogenesis,"  and  "Development." 


CHAPTER   X. 

THE  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THE  SCIENCES. 

§  i. — Summary  as  to  the  Material  of  Science. 
IN  the  first  chapter  of  this  Grammar  we  saw  that 
science  claims  for  its  heritage  the  whole  domain  to 
which  the  word  knowledge  can  be  legitimately  applied ; 
that  it  refuses  to  admit  any  co-heirs  to  its  possessions, 
and  asserts  that  its  own  slow  and  laborious  processes 
of  research  are  the  sole  profitable  modes  of  cultivation, 
the  only  tillage  from  which  we  can  reach  a  harvest  of 
truth  unchoked  by  dogmatic  tares.  In  the  further 
course  of  our  volume  we  have  seen  that  knowledge  is 
essentially  a  description  and  not  an  explanation — that 
the  object  of  science  is  to  describe  in  conceptual  short- 
hand the  routine  of  our  past  experience,  with  a  view 
of  predicting  the  future.  The  work  of  science  viewed 
from  the  psychological  standpoint  is  thus  essentially 
that  of  association,  and  from  the  physical  standpoint 
the  development  of  the  various  excitatory  connections 
between  the  several  portions  of  the  cortex  or  the 
centres  of  brain  activity.  We  have  immediate  sense- 
impressions  ;  these  arc  in  part  retained  as  stored 
sense-impresses,  and  are  capable  of  being  revived  by 
kindred  immediate  sense-impressions.  From  the 
stored  sense-impresses  we  form  by  association  con- 
ceptions, which  may  or  may  not  be  real  limits  to 
perceptual  processes.  These  conceptions  are  in  the 
latter  case  only  ideal  symbols, conceptual  shorthand  by 


442  THE   GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

aid  of  which  we  index  or  classify  immediate  sense-im- 
pressions, stored  sense-impresses,  or  other  conceptions 
themselves.  This  is  the  process  of  scientific  thought, 
which  probably  has  for  its  physical  aspect  the  develop- 
ment or  establishment  of  what  the  physiologist  would 
term  "commissural "  links  between  the  physical 
centres  of  thought.1 

To  recognize  that  the  contents  of  the  mind  thus 
ultimately  take  their  origin  in  sense-impressions,  and 
in  our  modes  of  perceiving  sense-impressions,  may 
indeed  limit  the  material  which  we  have  to  classify, 
by  removing,  for  example,  natural  theology  and  meta- 
physics from  the  field  of  knowledge  ;  but  it  still  does 
not  render  the  task  of  classifying  the  various  depart- 
ments of  science  an  easy  one.  Indeed,  so  soon  as  we 
approach  any  definite  range  of  perceptual  experience, 
we  feel  at  once  the  need  of  a  specialist  to  tell  us  "  the 
lie  of  the  land  " — to  describe  to  us  how  it  is  related  to 
surrounding  districts  and  what  are  the  exact  bearings 
of  the  corresponding  branch  of  science  on  other 
problems  of  life  and  mind.  The  development  of  the 
embryo  before  birth  may  be  a  reproduction  in  minia- 
ture of  the  evolution  of  the  species  ;  the  changes  of 
minute  microscopic  organisms  may  be  crucial  for 
theories  of  heredity  or  of  disease  which  involve 
momentous  results  for  sociology  ;  the  mathematician 
carried  along  on  his  flood  of  symbols,  dealing  appar- 
ently with  purely  formal  truths,  may  still  reach  results 
of  endless  importance  for  our  description  of  the 

1  The  extent  to  which  the  localization  of  the  centres  of  thought,  or  of 
the  different  elements  of  consciousness  has  already  proceeded  would  be 
brought  home  to  the  reader  by  even  a  cursory  inspection  of  II.  C. 
Bastian  :  The  Brain  as  an  Organ  of  Mind  (pp.  477-700) ;  or  J.  Ross  : 
On  Aphasia  (especially  pp.  87-127). 


THE  CLASSIFICATION   OF   THE  SCIENCES.        443 

physical  universe.  Such  possibilities  suffice  to  show 
how  incapable  any  individual  scientist  must  nowa- 
days be  of  truly  measuring  the  importance  of  each 
separate  branch  of  science  and  of  seeing  its  relation 
to  the  whole  of  human  knowledge.  An  adequate 
classification  could  only  be  reached  by  a  group  of 
scientists  having  a  wide  appreciation  of  each  other's 
fields,  and  a  thorough  knowledge  of  their  own  branches 
of  learning.  They  must  further  be  endowed  with 
sympathy  and  patience  enough  to  work  out  a  scheme 
in  combination.  Their  labours  would,  indeed,  in 
course  of  time,  come  to  have  only  historical  value,  but 
their  scheme  would  have  very  great  interest  as  a  map 
of  the  field  already  covered  by  science  and  as  a 
suggestion  to  the  lay  reader  of  the  innumerable  high- 
ways and  byways  by  which  we  are  gradually  but 
surely  reaching  truth. 

§  2.— Bacon's  "  Intellectual  Globe." 

Failing  such  combined  action  on  the  part  of  our 
scientific  leaders,  we  are  compelled  to  turn  to  what 
individual  thinkers  have  done  by  way  of  classifying 
the  sciences,  and  in  the  first  place  we  ought  at  least 
to  refer  to  three  well-known  philosophers  who  have 
dealt  with  this  subject  at  length.  I  mean  to  Francis 
Bacon,  Auguste  Comte,  and  Herbert  Spencer. 

Bacon  has  given  us  a  classification  of  the  sciences 
in  his  Of  the  Dignity  and  Advancement  of  Learning, 
and  in  his  Description  of  the  Intellectual  Globe,  which 
were  originally  intended  as  parts  of  that  Instanratio 
Magna  by  which  human  knowledge  was  to  be 
revolutionized.  But  Bacon,  like  many  another 
reformer,  was  the  product  of  the  very  system  he 
denounced.  While  he  saw  the  evils  of  mediaeval 


444  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

scholasticism,  he  could  never  quite  free  himself  from 
their  modes  of  thought  and  expression.  His  classi- 
fication, however  historically  interesting,  is  thus 
wanting  from  the  standpoint  of  modern  science,  and 
we  shall  only  briefly  summarize  it  here  with  a  view 
of  gaining  insight  from  its  defects. 

Human  learning,  according  to  Bacon,  takes  its 
origin  in  the  three  faculties  of  the  understanding- 
Memory,  Imagination,  and  Reason  ;  and  upon  this 
basis  Bacon  starts  his  analysis  of  knowledge.  The 
accompanying  scheme,  in  which  I  have  modernized 
some  of  the  terminology  and  omitted  some  of  the 
details,  represents  Bacon's  classification.  The  reader 
will  observe  at  once  that  there  are  no  clear  distinc- 
tions drawn  between  the  material  of  knowledge  and 
knowledge  itself,  between  the  real  and  the  ideal,  or 
between  the  phenomenal  world  and  the  unreal 
products  of  metaphysical  thought.  Man  is  not 
classed  under  nature,  and  a  mysterious  Philosophia 
Prima  or  Sapience  is  postulated  which  deals  with  the 
"  highest  stages  of  things,"  divine  and  human.  The 
axioms  which  Bacon  gives  as  specimens  of  this 
Sapience  are  not  very  suggestive  of  what  this  hitherto 
wanting  branch  of  science  would  be  like ;  they  are  either 
logical  axioms  or  fanciful  analogies  between  natural 
theology,  physics,  and  morals.  The  scheme  as  it 
stands  is  a  curious  product  of  a  transition  period  of 
thought.  With  its  "  errors  of  nature," — the  anomies  in 
which  nature  is  driven  out  of  its  course  by  "the 
pcrverseness,  insolence,  and  frowardness  of  matter  "- 
and  with  its  "  purified  magic,"  we  recognize  its  author 
as  on  the  fringe  of  the  Middle  Ages,  but  when  we  turn 
more  closely  to  his  analysis  of  History  and  Sociology, 
we  feel  that  Bacon's  classification  has  hardly  been 


THE   CLASSIFICATION   OF   THE  SCIENCES.        445 


without  influence  on  the  scheme  of  the  modem 
Spencer.  Indeed,  one  essentially  Baconian  idea  has 
been  adopted  by  Spencer.  This  idea  will  be  found 

HUMAN  LEARNING. 


MEMORY. 

IMAGINATION. 

REASON. 

History. 

Poesy. 

PhilosoJJiyt  or  the  Sciences. 

Natural. 

Civil. 

Divinity. 

Natural  Philosophy.               \ 

t 

-wUw 

W 

p 

0^ 

s 

O 

52, 

H 

God. 

Nature. 

Man. 

f 

rrors 
nomies). 

Dnds 
ontrol  by  Man). 

:clesiastical. 

•? 
i 

1 

iisr! 
K'1"' 

! 
1 

irabolic  (Fables). 

ramatic. 

arrative,  or  Heroic 

< 

a 

I' 

Natural  Theolo 

Operative. 

C/2 

8 
I' 

I 

"c«G 

Sg; 

Is 

B*? 
Jj 

Generations. 

_™l_a."  l_ExPei 
Pretergeneratic 

(Monsters). 

> 

, 

1 

sl: 

I- 

EL 

gy,  Natllre  of  An^ 

|  Purified  M£ 

f  Mechanics. 

Metaphysics 
(Form  and  Final 

Physics 
(Material  and  Se 

I. 

3 

5" 

5' 

I 

r- 

I 

(-n 

r 

S 

iment 

3 

s' 

o 

! 

S' 

$ 

8 

1 

I 

lusine 

3 

8 

° 

W 

M 

K 

ssi 
?n.§ 

P 

r~ 

C/3 
|, 

p 

e 

B1 
g1 

1 

R'is 
5'  r 

g 

>urse. 

| 

||l 

| 

I 

5- 

!* 

:J|P 

cr 

o 

^ 

9 

I' 

v; 

r* 

pp 

0 

3  1 

3 

r 

p|p 

P 

Mathematics. 

y 

in  the  Advancement  of  Learning^  bk.  iii.  chap.  i. 
"  The  divisions  of  knowledge,"  Bacon  writes,  "  are 
net  like  several  lines  that  meet  in  one  angle,  but 
are  rather  like  branches  of  a  tree  that  meet  in  one 
stem."  This  idea,  common  to  Bacon  and  Spencer, 


44°"  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

that  the  sciences  spring  from  one  root,  is  opposed 
to  the  view  of  Comte,  who  arranges  the  sciences  in 
a  series  or  staircase. 

§  3.— Comtek  "Hierarchy!' 

Now  in  some  respects  science  owes  a  debt  of 
gratitude  to  Comte,  not  indeed  for  his  scientific  work, 
nor  for  his  classification  of  the  sciences,  but  because 
he  taught  that  the  basis  of  all  knowledge  is  experi- 
ence and  succeeded  in  impressing  this  truth  on  a 
certain  number  of  people  not  yet  imbued  with  the 
scientific  spirit,  and  possibly  otherwise  inaccessible  to 
it.  The  truth  was  not  a  new  one  —  Bacon  had 
recalled  it  to  men's  minds  with  greater  power  than 
Comte  ever  did  ;  it  had  been  essentially  the  creed  of 
the  scientists  who  preceded  and  followed  Comte,  and 
of  whom  the  majority  never  probably  opened  his 
writings.  Yet  because  Comte  repudiated  all  meta- 
physical hypotheses  as  no  contributions  to  knowledge, 
and  taught  that  the  sole  road  to  truth  was  through 
science,  he  was  in  so  far  working  for  the  cause  of 
human  progress,  and  his  services  are  not  necessarily 
cancelled  by  the  peculiar  religious  doctrines  which  he 
propounded  at  a  later  period  of  his  life. 

According  to  Comte  there  are  six  fundamental 
sciences  :  Mathematics,  Astronomy,  Physics,  Chemis- 
try, Biology,  Sociology,  culminating  in  the  seventh  or 
final  science  of  Morals.  In  the  supreme  science  of 
morals  lies  the  "  synthetical  terminus  of  the  whole 
scientific  construction."  The  hierarchy  of  the  sciences 
thus  postulated  suffices  in  a  very  obscurely  stated 
manner  to  guide  the  Positivist  in  the  subdivision  of 
each  special  science.  For  the  scala  intellectus,  as 
propounded  by  Comte,  I  have  been  able  to  find  in  his 


THE   CLASSIFICATION   OF  THE   SCIENCES.        447 

"  System  "  no  more  valid  argument  than  is  contained 
in  the  following  passage  : — 

"  The  conception  of  the  hierarchy  of  the  sciences  from  this  point  of 
view  implies,  at  the  outset,  the  admission  that  the  systematic  study  of 
man  is  logically  and  scientifically  subordinate  to  that  of  Humanity,  the 
latter  alone  unveiling  to  us  the  real  laws  of  the  intelligence  and  activity. 
Paramount  as  the  theory  of  our  emotional  nature,  studied  in  itself,  must 
ultimately  be,  without  this  preliminary  step  it  would  have  no  consistence. 
Morals  thus  objectively  made  dependent  on  Sociology,  the  next  step  is 
easy  and  similar  ;  objectively  Sociology  becomes  dependent  on  Biology, 
as  our  cerebral  existence  evidently  rests  on  our  purely  bodily  life.  These 
two  steps  carry  us  on  to  the  conception  of  Chemistry  as  the  normal  basis 
of  Biology,  since  we  allow  that  vitality  depends  on  the  general  laws  of 
the  combination  of  matter.  Chemistry  again  in  its  turn  is  objectively 
subordinate  to  Physics,  by  virtue  of  the  influence  which  the  universal 
properties  of  matter  must  always  exercise  on  the  specific  qualities  of  the 
different  substances.  Similarly  Physics  become  subordinate  to  Astro- 
nomy when  we  recognize  the  fact  that  the  existence  of  our  terrestrial 
environment  is  carried  on  in  perpetual  subjection  to  the  conditions  of 
our  planet  as  one  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  Lastly,  Astronomy  is  sub- 
ordinated to  Mathematics  by  virtue  of  the  evident  dependence  of  the 
geometrical  and  mechanical  phenomena  of  the  heavens  on  the  universal 
laws  of  number,  extension,  and  motion." 

According  to  Cornte  nothing  can  ever  supersede 
the  need  for  the  individual  "  to  acquire  successively, 
as  the  race  has  acquired,  the  knowledge  of  each  of 
the  seven  phases  which  meet  him  in  the  relative 
conception  of  the  order  of  the  world."  It  perhaps 
requires  little  critical  power  to  demolish  a  scheme 
so  fanciful  that  mathematics  are  related  to  physics 
through  astronomy,  and  physics  to  biology  through 
chemistry  ! L  What  remains,  indeed,  to  be  said  of  a 
philosopher  who  gravely  asserts  that  the  study  of 
each  science  is  to  be  limited  by  the  requirements  of 

1  How  much,  too,  of  the  real  understanding  of  mathematical  truths 
is  based  on  psychology,  on  a  right  appreciation  of  those  modes  of  per- 
ception which  have  geometrical  conceptions  for  ideal  limits  !  (p.  214-7). 


448  THE  GRAMMAR   OF  SCIENCE. 

the  one  next  above  it,  in  order  that  we  may  reach  as 
soon  as  possible  the  supreme  science  of  morals,  for, 
"  if  carried  further,  the  cultivation  of  the  intellect 
inevitably  becomes  a  mere  idle  amusement "  ?  It 
is  clear  that  we  have  in  Comte's  staircase  of  the 
intellect  a  purely  fanciful  scheme,  which,  like  the  rest 
of  his  System  of  Positive  Polity,  is  worthless  from  the 
standpoint  of  modern  science.1 

§  4. — Spencer's  Classification. 

Historically,  however,  Comte  is  an  interesting  link 
between  Bacon  and  Spencer.  For  Comte  deduces 
his  hierarchy  from  fifteen  axiomatic  statements  which 
he  asserts  realize  the  noble  aspiration  of  Bacon  for  a 
Philosophia  Prima  (p.  444),  and  which  were  clearly 
not  only  suggested  by  Bacon's  axioms,  but  surpassed 
them  in  want  of  scientific  definition.  On  the  other 
hand,  it  is  difficult  not  to  admit  that  the  writings  of 
Comte  have  at  the  very  least  acted  as  a  stimulus — if 
of  the  irritant  kind — to  Spencer's  thought.2  Much 
more  importance  must,  however,  be  attached  to 
Spencer's  than  to  Comte's  scheme  for  classifying  the 
sciences,  in  particular  because  he  returns  to  Bacon's 
notion  of  the  sciences  as  the  branches  of  a  tree  spread- 
ing out  from  a  common  root,  and  rejects  the  staircase 
arrangement  of  the  Positivist  hierarchy.  The  root  of 
this  tree  is  to  be  sought  in  phenomena,  and  its  trunk 

1  The  reader  who  wishes  to  verify  this  conclusion  may  be  referred  to 
Chapter  III.,  "  Definitive  Systematization  of  the  Positive  Doctrine,"  in 
vol.  iv.   of  the   System   of  Positive  Polity,    translated   by   Congreve 
(London,  1877).     See  for  the  hierarchy  of  the  sciences,  p.  160  et  seq. 
Compare   Huxley  :    "  The   Scientific   Aspects    of    Positivism,"    Lay 
Sermons,  Addresses,  and  Reviews  (London,  1870),  pp.  162-91. 

2  See  his    "Reasons   fcr  Dissenting    from    the    Philosophy  of   M. 
Comte,"  Essays,  vol.  iii.  p.  58. 


THE   CLASSIFICATION   OF   THE   SCIENCES.        449 

at  once  divides  into  two  main  branches,  the  one 
corresponding  to  the  sciences  which  deal  solely  with 
the  forms  under  which  phenomena  are  known  to  us, 
and  the  other  to  the  sciences  which  deal  with  the 
subject-matter  of  phenomena.  These  divisions  are 
respectively  those  of  the  Abstract  and  the  Concrete 
Sciences.  The  former  embraces  Logic  and  Mathe- 
matics,  or  the  sciences  which  deal  with  the  modes 
under  which  we  perceive  things  ;  the  latter  deals 
with  the  groups  of  sense-impressions  and  the  stored 
sense-impresses  we  perceive  under  these  modes. 
From  the  standpoint  taken  in  this  Grammar, 
namely,  that  all  science  is  a  conceptual  description, 
the  Abstract  Sciences  must  not  be  considered  as 
dealing  with  the  space  and  time  of  perception,  but 
rather  with  the  conceptual  space  (p.  203)  and  abso- 
lute time  (p.  227)  of  the  scientific  description.  This 
distinction  is  of  importance,  for  Bain  has  called  in 
question  Spencer's  language  about  the  Abstract 
Sciences  by  asking  how  Time  and  Space  can  be 
thought  of  without  any  concrete  embodiment  what- 
ever, i.e.,  as  empty  forms.  This  objection  holds  with 
regard  to  the  perceptual  modes,  space  and  time,  but 
hardly  with  regard  to  the  conceptual  notions  of 
geometrical  space  and  absolute  time  by  which  the 
physicist  represents  these  modes.  Spencer's  opening 
paragraph  on  this  point  may  be  quoted  :— 

"  Whether  as  some  hold,  Space  and  Time  are  forms  of  Thought ;  or 
whether  as  I  hold  myself,  they  are  forms  of  Things,  that  have  become 
forms  of  Thought  through  organized  and  inherited  experience  of 
Things ;  it  is  equally  true  that  Space  and  Time  are  contrasted 
absolutely  with  the  existences  disclosed  to  us  in  Space  and  Time  ; 
and  that  the  Sciences  which  deal  exclusively  with  Space  and  Time, 
are  separated  by  the  profoundest  of  all  distinctions  from  the  Sciences 
which  deal  with  the  existences  that  Space  and  Time  contain.  Space  is 

30 


450  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

the  abstract  of  all  relations  of  coexistence.  Time  is  the  abstract  of  all 
relations  of  sequence.  And  dealing  as  they  do  entirely  with  relations 
of  coexistence  and  sequence  in  their  general  or  special  forms,  Logic  and 
Mathematics  form  a  class  of  the  Sciences  more  widely  unlike  the  rest, 
than  any  of  the  rest  can  be  from  one  another."  I 

Now  it  cannot  be  said  that  this  passage  brings  out 
very  clearly  the  distinctions  between  the  phenomenal 
reality  of  space  and  time,  their  perceptual  modality 
and  their  conceptual  equivalents.  But  what  it  does 
bring  out  is  this,  that  according  to  Spencer  the 
latter  or  conceptual  values  form  the  basis  of  scientific 
classification.  And  this  is  in  complete  agreement 
with  the  views  expressed  in  this  Grammar.  That 
Spencer  himself,  admitting  space  and  time  to  be 
forms  of  perception,  yet  considers  them  to  be  forms  of 
things,  appears  to  be  merely  an  instance  of  that  un- 
necessary duplication,  which  is  met  by  the  canon  that 
we  ought  not  to  multiply  existences  beyond  what  are 
necessary  to  account  for  phenomena.2 

Turning  to  the  Concrete  Sciences,  or  those  which 
deal  with  phenomena  themselves,  Spencer  makes  a 
new  division  into  Abstract-Concrete  and  Concrete 
Sciences  \  the  former,  he  tells  us,  treat  of  phenomena 
"  in  their  elements,"  and  the  latter  of  phenomena 
"  in  their  totalities."  This  leads  him  to  associate 
Astronomy  with  Biology  and  Sociology  rather  than 
with  Mechanics  and  Physics.  Such  a  classification 
may  fit  some  verbal  distinction  of  formal  logic,  but 
it  is  certainly  not  one  that  a  student  of  these 
subjects  would  find  helpful  in  directing  his  reading, 
or  which  would  ever  have  been  suggested  by  a 
specialist  in  either  physics  or  astronomy.  But  this 

1  "  The  Classification  of  the  Sciences,"  Essays,  vol.  iii.  p.  10. 

2  Entia  non  sunt  mulliplicanda  praeter  necessitates.   See  Appendix, 
Note  ///. 


THE  CLASSIFICATION   OF  THE   SCIENCES.        451 

peculiarity  of  Spencer's  system  which  separates 
Astronomy  from  its  nearest  cognates  Mechanics  and 
Physics  is  not  its  only  disadvantage.  His  third 
group  of  Concrete  Sciences  is  again  subdivided  on 
what  he  terms  the  principle  of  the  "  redistribution 
of  force."  This  he  states  in  the  following  words  : — 

"A  decreasing  quantity  of  motion,  sensible  or 
insensible,  always  has  for  its  concomitant  an 
increasing  aggregation  of  matter,  and  conversely  an 
increasing  quantity  of  motion,  sensible  or  insensible, 
has  for  its  concomitant  a  decreasing  aggregation  of 
matter."  * 

Now  I  have  cited  this  vague  principle  of  the 
"  redistribution  of  force  "  with  the  view  of  showing 
how  dangerous  ic  is  for  any  individual  to  attempt  to 
classify  the  sciences  even  if  he  possesses  Spencer's 
ability.  For  this  principle  has,  so  far  as  I  am  aware, 
no  real  foundation  in  physics  and  therefore  cannot 
form  a  satisfactory  starting-point  for  classifying  the 
Concrete  Sciences.  According  to  Spencer,  where 
there  is  increase  of  motion  there  is  decreasing 
aggregation  of  "  matter."  Yet  we  have  only  to 
drop  a  weight  to  see  increase  of  motion  accom- 
panying increased  aggregation  of  "  matter,"  namely, 
earth  and  weight  approaching  each  other.  The  prin- 
ciple of  u  redistribution  of  force  "  seems,  so  far  as 
I  can  grasp  it  at  all,  to  flatly  contradict  the  modern 
principle  of  the  conservation  of  energy.  Indeed 
Spencer's  whole  discussion  of  the  physical  sciences  is 
one  which  no  physical  specialist  would  be  able,  were 
he  indeed  willing,  to  accept.  So  I  fancy  it  must 
always  be,  when  any  one  individual  attempts  to 
classify  the  whole  field  of  human  knowledge.  At 

1  Essays,  vol.  iii.  p.  27. 


452  THE   GRAMMAR   OF  SCIENCE. 

best  the  result  will  be  suggestive,  but  as  a  complete 
and  consistent  system  it  must  be  more  or  less  of 
a  failure.  But  there  is  a  good  deal  to  be  learnt  from 
Spencer's  classification,  for  it  combines  the  "  tree  " 
system  of  Bacon  with  Comte's  exclusion  of  theology 
and  metaphysics  from  the  field  of  knowledge. 
Especially  in  the  primary  division  into  Abstract  and 
Concrete  Sciences,1  it  provides  us  with  an  excellent 
starting-point. 

§  5. — Precise  and  Synoptic  Sciences. 

The  scheme  I  propose  to  lay  before  the  reader  pre- 
tends to  no  logical  exactness,  but  is  merely  a  rough 
outline  which  attempts  to  show  how  the  various 
branches  of  science  are  related  to  those  fundamental 
scientific  concepts,  conceptual  space,  absolute  time, 
motion,  molecule,  atom,  ether,  variation,  inheritance, 
natural  selection,  social  evolution,  which  have  formed 
the  chief  topics  of  earlier  chapters.  The  writer  is 
content  to  call  it  an  enumeration,  if  the  logician 
refuses  it  the  title  of  classification  ;  for  he  readily 
admits  that  he  is  not  likely  to  be  successful  where 
Bacon,  Comte,  and  Spencer  have  failed. 

In  proceeding  to  discuss  a  scheme,  we  have  to  bear 
in  mind  the  following  points  :  Science  is  not  a  mere 
catalogue  of  facts,  but  is  the  conceptual  model  by 
which  we  briefly  resume  our  experience  of  those  facts 
Hence  we  find  that  many  branches  of  science,  which 
call  for  admission  into  a  practical  classification,  are  in 
reality  only  sciences  in  the  making,  and  correspond 
to  the  catalogue  raisonne  rather  than  to  the  complete 
conceptual  model.  Their  ultimate  position,  there- 

1  The  germ  of  this  division  appears  also  to  be  due  to  Bacon  :  see  his 
scheme,  p.  445. 


THE  CLASSIFICATION   OF   THE   SCIENCES.        453 

fore,  cannot  be  absolutely  fixed.  The  distinction 
between  those  physical  sciences  which  have  been 
reduced  to  a  more  or  less  complete  conceptual  model 
and  those  which  remain  in  the  catalogue  raisonne 
state  has  been  expressed  by  terming  the  former  Exact 
and  the  latter  Descriptive.  But  since  in  the  present 
work  we  have  learnt  to  look  upon  all  science  as  a 
description,  the  distinction  rather  lies  in  the  extent  to 
which  the  synoptic  classification  has  been  replaced  by 
those  brief  conceptual  resumes  that  we  term  scientific 
formulae  or  laws.  Thus,  while  descriptive  must  be 
interpreted  in  the  sense  of  synoptic,  exact  must  be 
taken  as  equivalent  to  concise  or  precise,  in  the  sense 
of  the  French  precis.  The  distinction  is  now  seen  to 
be  quantitative  rather  than  qualitative ;  and,  as  a 
matter  of  fact,  considerable  portions  of  the  Descriptive 
or  Synoptic  Physical  Sciences  already  belong,  or  are 
rapidly  being  transferred  to,  the  Exact  or  Precise 
Pliysical  Sciences.  Thus  we  shall  find  that,  whenever 
we  begin  to  subdivide  the  main  branches  of  science, 
the  boundaries  are  only  practical  and  not  logical. 
The  topics  classified  in  the  subdivisions  cross  and 
recross  these  boundaries ;  arid  although  in  the  tables 
below  most  sciences  have  been  entered  in  one  place 
only,  they  frequently  belong  to  two  or  more  divisions 
at  once.  Hence  in  the  correlation  of  the  sciences 
and  their  continual  growth  lies  the  fact  of  the  em- 
pirical and  tentative  character  of  all  schemes  of 
classification.  In  so  far  as  every  branch  of  science 
passes,  at  one  or  more  points,  not  only  into  the 
domain  of  adjacent,  but  even  of  distant,  branches,  we 
see  a  certain  justification  for  Comte's  assertion  that 
the  study  of  one  science  involves  a  previous  study  of 
other  branches  ;  but  this  justification  in  itself  is  no 


454  ™E  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

argument  for  the  truth  of  his  fantastic  "  hierarchy  " 
of  sciences  (p.  446). 

§  6.  —  Abstract  and  Concrete  Sciences.  —  Abstract  Science. 

Like  Spencer,  we  may  begin  by  distinguishing  in 
science  two  groups—  the  Abstract  and  the  Concrete. 
The  former  group  deals  with  the  conceptual  equi- 
valents of  the  modes  under  which  the  perceptive 
faculty  discriminates  objects,  the  latter  with  the  con- 
cepts by  aid  of  which  we  describe  the  contents  of 
perception.  We  have  then,  to  start  with,  the  follow- 
ing division  :  — 

Perceptions  (Sense-  Impressions  and  Stored  Impresses). 


J 

of 


Modes  of  Perception.  Contents  of  Perception  . 

Abstract  Science.  Concrete  Science. 

Now  the  two  modes  in  which  we  perceive  things 
apart,  or  discriminate  groups  of  sense-impressions,  are 
time  and  space.  Hence  Abstract  Science  may  deal  with 
the  general  relations  of  discrimination,  apply  ing  to  both 
time  and  space  without  specializing  the  mode  of  per- 
ception ;  or  it  may  refer  in  particular  to  space  or  to  time 
or  to  their  mixed  mode  motion.  The  general  relations 
of  discrimination  may  be  either  qualitative  or  quantita- 
tive. The  former  branch  is  termed  Logic^  and  discusses 
the  general  laws  by  which  we  identify  and  discriminate 
things,  or  what  are  frequently  termed  the  laws  of 
thought.  A  fundamental  part  of  logic  is  the  study  of 
the  right  use  of  language,  the  clear  definition  and,  if 
needful,  invention  of  terms,  —  Orthology.  The  object 
of  the  present  Grammar  has  been  chiefly  to  show  how 
a  want  of  clear  definition  has  led  to  the  metaphysical 
obscurities  of  modern  science. 


THE   CLASSIFICATION   OF  THE  SCIENCES.        455 

Both  Time  and  Space  lead  us  at  once  to  the  con- 
ception of  quantity  or  number,  and  we  thus  have  a 
large  and  important  branch  of  Abstract  Science  which 
deals  with  the  laws  of  quantity.  Now  quantity  may 
be  either  discrete  and  definite,  like  the  numbers  of 
arithmetic  8,  100,  J/I3,  J7/4,  &c,  the  number  of  inhabi- 
tants of  a  town,  the  number  of  cubic  feet  in  a  room  ; 
or  it  may  be  continuous  and  changing  with  other 
quantities — for  example,  like  the  height  of  the  baro- 
meter with  the  hour  of  the  day,  the  marriage  or  birth- 
rate with  the  price  of  bread,  the  position  or  speed  of 
a  body  with  the  time.  We  thus  have  a  distinction 
between  discrete  quantity  and  quantity  capable  of 
gradual  variation  or  change.  Among  the  sciences 
which  deal  especially  (if  not  entirely)  with  discrete 
quantity,  the  best  known  are  probably  Arithmetic 
and  Algebra ;  but  there  are  a  number  of  others  we 
ought  to  briefly  note.  We  want  to  know  how  to 
measure  quantity  and  what  errors  are  likely  to  arise 
in  its  measurement.  Closely  allied  to  this  is  the 
discussion  of  probable  and  average  quantities,  deal- 
ing with  cases  where  we  cannot  measure  individual 
quantity,  but  only  approximate  and  average  results. 
Hence  arise  the  Theory  of  Measiirement,  Theory  of 
Errors,  Theory  of  Probability,  Theory  of  Statistics, 
&c.,  &c. 

Passing  to  change  in  quantity,  we  remark  that  if  one 
quantity  varies  with  another  it  is  said  to  be  a  function 
of  the  second.  Thus  temperature  is  a  function  of 
time  and  of  position,  brightness  of  distance,  and  speed 
of  time.  To  understand  the  mutual  relationship  of 
quantities  which  are  functions  of  each  other  is  the 
scope  of  sciences  like  the  Theory  of  Functions,  which 
teaches  us  how  functions  can  be  represented  and 


456  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

handled.  Examples  of  this  representation  will  be 
found  in  our  chapter  on  the  Geometry  of  Motion,  Figs. 
10  and  13.  Special  branches  are  the  Differential 
Calculus  or  Calculus  of  Fluxions,  which  deals  with  the 
rates  of  change,  and  of  which  we  have  had  examples 
in  determining  speed  and  curvature  (pp.  257  and 
270)  ;  and  the  Integral  Calculus •,  or  Calculus  of  Sums, 
which  passes  from  the  relation  between  the  rates  back 
to  the  relation  between  the  changing  quantities,  and 
of  which  we  have  had  an  example  in  the  process  of 
summation  by  which  we  passed  from  acceleration  as 
a  function  of  position  to  the  map  of  the  path  of  a 
moving  body  (p.  277). 

We  next  turn  to  the  special  relations  of  Space,  and 
we  note  that  conceptual  space  may  be  considered 
from  two  standpoints.  We  may  deal  solely  with  the 
relative  position  of  points  and  lines  and  surfaces 
without  taking  any  quantitative  measurements  of 
distances,  areas,  or  volumes.  This  forms  a  very  impor- 
tant and  valuable  sub-division  of  Geometry,  which  has 
been  much  developed  of  recent  years  and  has  been 
largely  used  by  theoretical  writers  on  various  branches 
of  engineering  practice.  It  is  termed  Descriptive 
Geometry,  or  the  Geometry  of  Position,  and  a  branch 
of  it,  probably  familiar  to  the  reader,  is  Perspective 
Geometry.  On  the  quantitative  or  measuring  side  of 
the  special  space  division  of  Abstract  Science,  we 
deal  with  size,  and  find  such  subdivisions  as  Metrical 
Geometry — of  which  a  large  part  of  Euclid's  Elements 
is  constituted, —  Trigonometry  and  Mensuration. 

The  second  branch  of  special  relations  ought  to 
deal  with  Time,  but  as  in  reality  all  our  spacial 
discrimination  is  associated  with  time,  so  all  our 
temporal  discrimination  is  associated  with  space  ;  we 


THE  CLASSIFICATION   OF  THE   SCIENCES.         457 

do  in  actual  perception  separate  all  things  in  both 
time  and  space  concurrently,  for  the  immediate 
groups  of  sense-impressions  are  not  really  simul- 
taneous, and  most  things  perceived  in  space  are 
"constructs"  involving  stored  sense-impresses  (pp.  50, 
219).  When,  therefore,  we  speak  of  the  special  relations 
of  Time,  we  are  referring  to  that  discrimination  by- 
sequence  which  we  term  change,  and  of  which  the 
fundamental  element  is  really  the  time-mode  of  per- 
ception—conceptually we  are  referring  to  change  as 
measured  in  Absolute  Time  (pp.  227,  288).  When 
changes  are  not  measured  quantitatively,  but  only 
described  qualitatively,  we  require  a  theory  by  aid  of 
which  we  may  accurately  observe  and  describe  such 
changes.  We  want  not  only  a  scientific  theory  of 
measurement,  but  a  scientific  theory  of  observation 
and  description.  For  example,  in  the  case  of  organic 
phenomena  of  all  sorts  it  requires  a  scientific  training 
not  only  to  know  what  it  is  essential  to  observe,  but 
how  what  has  been  observed  should  be  described. 
Some  discussion  of  the  Theories  of  Observation  and 
Description  are  given  in  treatises  on  Logic,  but  they 
seem  capable  of  much  more  complete  treatment  than 
they  have  at  present  received.1 

The  last  branch  of  Abstract  Science  to  which  we 
must  refer  is  the  quantitative  side  of  change.  Thus 
we  may  consider  change  in  position  and  develop  a 
theory  of  the  motion  of  conceptual  bodies  without 
reference  to  the  special  structures  and  special  types 
of  motion  by  which  we  conceptualize  change  in 
phenomena.  This  branch  of  science  is  termed  Kine- 
matics^ or  the  Geometry  of  Motion^  and,  on  account 

1  One  of  the  best  practical  trainings  in  Observation  and  Description  is 
that  gained  by  a  clinical  clerk  in  a  hospital  ward. 


458 


THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 


of  its  fundamental  importance,  has  been  fully  dis- 
cussed in  our  Chapter  VI.  It  has  made  very  great 
advances  in  recent  years,  and  not  only  from  the 
theoretical  standpoint;  in  cases  of  constrained  motion 
it  has  become  an  invaluable  auxiliary  in  the  practical 
construction  of  machines.1  Closely  allied  to  Kine- 
matics, if  not  more  properly  a  branch  of  them,  we 
have  a  science  which  deals  with  change  in  size  and 
shape.  This  is  the  Theory  of  Strains,  and  it  has 
a  wide  application  in  the  conceptual  description  of 
many  portions  of  physics  (p.  242). 


A.—  ABSTRACT  SCJENCE.     Modes  of  Discrimination. 

GENERAL  RELATIONS  OF 
DISCRIMINATION. 

RELATIONS  PECULIAR  TO  SPACE  AND 
TIME. 

Space, 

Time, 

Qualitative. 

Quantitative. 

Discrimination  by 
Localization. 

Discrimination  by 
Sequence. 

0 

fa 

o    0 

ti0 

rO 

£ 

o 

1 

n 

II 

*<  n 

pi 

11 

|| 

1 
\ 

P 

3 

9 

V? 

rl 

'    JT. 

< 

ll 

HI 

JE? 

n 

n> 

§ 

f 

!:•! 

<5''xs<:!' 

Co^I  Jix 

try  of  Functio 
nlus  of  Rates 
ulus  of  Sums. 
kc.,  &c. 

Descriptive  G 

Metrical  Geon 
Trigonomet  ry 
Mensuration, 
&c.,  &c. 

Theories  ofOl 
Descriptior 
(allied  to  Logi 

Theory  of  St-> 
(Change  in  Siz 

Kinematics 
(Change  in  Po 

R'i  J 

3  5 

§ 

§. 

^     % 

p  S. 

£• 

~   g 

5g 

9 

Q 

g 

g 

o> 

R 

9 

5-. 

O) 

V 

H 

1 

1 
a 

D" 
P 

s 

1 

R, 

1  See   especially   L.   Burmester  :    Lehrbiich  der  Kinematik,   Bd.  i. 
Leipzig,  1888 — a  classical  treatise. 


THE   CLASSIFICATION   OF  THE   SCIENCES.        459 

With  this  we  complete  our  review  of  Abstract 
Science.  We  see  that  it  embraces  all  that  is  usually 
grouped  as  Logic  and  Pure  Mathematics.  In  these 
branches  we  deal  with  conceptual  modes  of  dis- 
crimination ;  and  since  the  concepts  formed  are  in 
general  narrowly  defined  and  free  from  the  infinite 
complexity  of  the  contents  of  perception,  we  are  able 
to  reason  with  great  preciseness,  so  that  the  results  of 
these  sciences  are  absolutely  valid  for  all  that  falls 
under  their  definitions  and  axioms.  On  this  account 
the  branches  of  Abstract  Science  are  frequently 
spoken  of  as  the  Exact  Sciences.  I  have  summarized 
our  classification  in  the  scheme  *on  the  opposite 
page. 

§  7. — Concrete  Science. — Inorganic  Phenomena. 

Passing  from  Abstract  to  Concrete  Science,  or  to  the 
contents  of  perception,  we  recall  the  distinction  which 
has  been  made  in  our  Chapter  IX.  between  the  living 
and  the  lifeless,  or  between  Organic  and  Inorganic 
Phenomena.  So  long  as  we  have  no  perceptual  ex- 
perience of  the  genesis  of  the  living  from  the  lifeless  we 
obtain  a  clear  partition  of  Concrete  Science  by  dividing 
it  into  branches  dealing  respectively  with  Inorganic 
and  Organic  Phenomena.  The  sciences  which  deal 
with  inorganic  phenomena  are  termed,  as  a  whole, 
the  Physical  Sciences. 

The  first  subdivision  of  these  sciences  may  be  re- 
ferred to  the  distinction  we  have  already  drawn 
between  the  Exact  PJiysical  Sciences  and  the  Descrip- 
tive Physical  Sciences,  or  as  we  will  term  them  the  Pre- 
cise and  the  Synoptic  Physical  Sciences  (p.  45  2).  Thus 
we  find  that  astronomers  are  able  to  predict  the  precise 
time  on  a  given  day  of  a  given  year  at  which  Venus 


460  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

will  appear  to  an  observer  at  a  given  position  on  the 
Earth's  surface  to  begin  its  transit  over  the  Sun's  disc. 
On  the  other  hand,  we  discover  by  everyday  experi- 
ence that  the  predictions  as  to  the  weather  due  to 
the  Meteorological  Office  and  published  in  the  daily 
newspapers  frequently  turn  out  incorrect,  or  are  only 
approximately  verified.  This  distinction  between 
Astronomy  and  Meteorology  is  just  the  distinction 
between  the  Precise  and  the  Synoptic  Sciences.  In  the 
one  case  we  have  not  only  a  rational  classification  of 
facts,  but  we  have  been  able  to  conceive  a  brief  formula, 
the  law  of  gravitation,  which  accurately  resumes  these 
facts.  We  have  succeeded  in  constructing,  by  aid  of 
ideal  particles,  a  conceptual  mechanism  which  de- 
scribes astronomical  changes.  In  the  other  case  we 
may  or  may  not  have  reached  a  perfect  classification  of 
facts,  but  we  certainly  have  not  been  able  to  formulate 
our  perceptual  experience  in  a  mechanism,  or  concep- 
tual motion,  which  would  enable  us  to  precisely  predict 
the  future.  The  Precise  and  the  Synoptic  Physical 
Sciences^  respectively,  correspond  very  closely  to  the 
phenomena,  of  which  we  have  constructed  a  conceptual 
model  by  aid  of  elementary  corpuscles  having  ideal 
motions,  and  to  the  phenomena  which  have  not  yet 
been  reduced  to  such  a  conceptual  description.  The 
process  of  analyzing  inorganic  phenomena  by  aid  of 
ideal  elementary  motions  forms  the  topic  of  Applied 
Mathematics?  This  science  is  therefore  a  link  between 
the  theory  of  pure  motion  as  discussed  in  Abstract 
Science  and  the  motions  of  those  ideal  corpuscles 
which  most  closely  conceptualize  the  sequences  of 

1  "  And  as  for  the  mixed  Mathematics,  I  may  only  make  this  predic- 
tion, that  there  cannot  fail  to  be  more  kinds  of  them  as  nature  grows 
further  disclosed  " — a  prophecy  of  Bacon's  which  has  been  fully  justified. 


THE  CLASSIFICATION   OF  THE   SCIENCES.         461 

inorganic  phenomena  as  discussed  in  the  precise 
branch  of  Concrete  Science. 

Where  we  have  not  yet  succeeded  in  analyzing 
complex  changes  into  ideal  motions,  or  have  only 
done  so  in  part — describing  without  quantitative 
calculation  the  general  results  which  might  be  ex- 
pected to  flow  from  such  motions — there  we  are 
dealing  with  the  Synoptic  Physical  Sciences.  Thus 
Synoptic  Physical  Science  is  rather  Precise  Physical 
Science  in  the  making  than  qualitatively  distinct  from 
it.  It  embraces  large  classifications  of  facts  which  we 
are  continually  striving  to  resume  in  simple  formulae 
or  laws,  and,  as  usual,  these  laws  are  laws  of  motion. 
Thus  considerable  portions  of  the  Synoptic  PJiysical 
Sciences  are  already  precise,  or  in  process  of  becoming 
precise.  This  is  notably  the  case  with  Chemistry, 
Geology,  and  Mineralogy.  So  much,  indeed,  is  this  the 
case  with  Chemistry  that  the  reader  will  find  that  I 
have  included  Theoretical  Chemistry  and  Spectrum 
Analysis  under  the  head  of  Precise  Physical  Science. 

Turning  to  the  system  of  corpuscles,  with  which 
we  have  dealt  in  Chapter  VI 1 1.,  we  find  in  them  an 
excellent  basis  for  classifying  the  Precise  Physical 
Sciences.  In  the  first  place  we  have  the  particle  and 
groups  of  particles  forming  bodies.  The  division  of 
Physics  dealing  with  the  motion  of  particles  or  bodies, 
or  of  molecules  in  bulk,  is  termed  Molar  Physics  from 
the  Latin  word  moles,  a  mass  or  bulk.  In  Molar 
Physics  we  deal  with  the  motion  which  conceptualizes 
the  changes  of  position  in  bodies  at  the  surface  of 
the  Earth,  Mechanics ;  with  the  motion  which  con- 
ceptualizes the  changes  in  the  planetary  system, 
Planetary  Theory ;  and  with  the  motion  by  which 
we  describe  changes  in  the  configuration  of  a  planet 
and  its  satellites,  Lunar  Theory. 


462  THE  GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

After  the  particle  we  deal  with  the  molecule,  and 
under  Molecular  Physics  treat  especially  of  those 
phenomena  which  can  be  conceptualized  by  the 
relative  motion  of  molecules.  Here  we  have  to 
consider  the  Elasticity,  Plasticity  (or  Viscosity),  and 
Cohesion  of  gaseous,  fluid,  and  solid  bodies.  By  aid 
of  the  motion  of  molecules  we  treat  of  the  pheno- 
mena of  Sound,  the  formation  of  crystals  or  Crystal- 
lography, the  Figure  of  the  Earth,  the  relative  motion 
of  the  parts  of  liquids  and  gases,  Hydromechanics, 
Aeromechanics,  and  the  Theory  of  the  Tides,  the  theory 
of  the  temperature  and  pressure  in  gases,  or  the 
Kinetic  Theory  of  Gases,  &c.,  &c. 

Passing  to  a  still  simpler  corpuscle,  the  atom,  we 
reach  Atomic  Physics.  The  motions  we  attribute 
to  the  concept  atom  form  the  basis  of  Theoretical 
Chemistry,  and  of  those  wonderful  lines  which  appear 
in  the  light,  transmitted  or  excited  by  any  chemical 
substance.  The  Theory  of  Spectrum  Analysis,  based 
on  the  elementary  motions  of  the  atom,  is  the  source 
of  our  knowledge  of  the  chemical  constitution  of  the 
sun  and  stars,  or  of  all  those  descriptions  of  perceptual 
experience  resumed  in  Solar  and  Sidereal  Physics. 

The  last  branch  of  the  Precise  Physical  Sciences  is 
termed  the  Physics  of  the  Ether  and  deals  with  the 
relative  motions  of  ether-elements,  or  the  changes  of 
shape  we  attribute  to  the  ether  (p.  313).  If  we 
consider  the  ether,  apart  from  the  molecules  we 
suppose  it  to  contain,  merely  as  a  medium  trans- 
mitting various  kinds  of  motions,  we  have  the  Theory 
of  Radiation,  which  describes  how  light,  heat,  and 
electro-magnetic  effects  are  conceived  to  be  pro- 
pagated from  molecule  to  molecule.  If  we  deal  with 
the  mutual  action  between  ether  and  molecule  (pp.333, 


THE   CLASSIFICATION   OF   THE   SCIENCES.         463 

368),  and  describe  how  molecules  disperse,  absorb, 
transmit,  or  conduct  optical,  thermal,  or  electro- 
magnetic effects,  we  have  the  remaining  portions  of 
the  fundamental  physical  sciences  of  Light^  Heat, 
Electricity,  and  Magnetism. 

From  the  Synoptic  Physical  Sciences  we  demand  a 
rational  classification  of  those  physical  phenomena 
which  have  not  at  present  been  conceptualized  by 
simple  formulae  of  motion.  Such  phenomena  we 
should  naturally  expect  to  find  where  in  ordinary 
parlance  there  are  "a  great  number  of  forces  con- 
temporaneously at  work,"  or  where,  in  more  accurate 
language,  the  number  of  elementary  bodies  by  which 
we  should  have  to  conceptualize  the  phenomena  is  so 
great  that  we  are  at  present  unable  by  synthesis 
(p.  283)  to  form  the  complex  motion,  which  would 
describe  the  changes  of  the  whole  system.  This  is 
particularly  the  case  in  the  sciences  which  deal  with 
the  evolution  and  structure  of  great  and  intricate 
bodies  like  a  planetary  system  or  a  planet  itself.  We 
desire  to  know  the  sequence  of  changes  by  which 
we  can  describe  the  evolution  of  a  planetary  system 
and  we  seek  an  answer  in  the  Nebular  Theory.  We 
desire  to  know  how  the  inorganic  structure  of  our 
Earth  has  developed, — Geology  describes  it.  Then  we 
turn  to  the  formation  of  the  surface  of  the  Earth,  and 
to  the  continual  changes  going  on  among  the  gases 
and  fluids  there,  and  study  Physical  Geography  and 
Meteorology. 

Finally,  we  inquire  into  the  structure  of  the  sub- 
stances which  form  our  environment  and  their 
relations  to  each  other,  thus  we  have  Mineralogy  and 
Chemistry  completing  the  range  of  the  Synoptic 
Physical  Sciences. 


464 


THE   GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 


The  following  table  resumes  our  classification  of 
the  Physical  Sciences :— 


B.—  CONCRETE  SCIENCE. 

Inorganic  Phenomena. 

Reduced  to  Ideal  Motions. 

Not  yet  Reduced  to  Ideal 
Motions. 

Precise  Physical  Sciences. 

Synoptic  Physical  Sciences. 

g 

K 

> 

V 

0 

0 

I 

o 

fc 

* 

. 

B 

o 

8 

*v 

9 

\ 

$ 

0 

8* 

R' 

cr 

2, 

1 

s 

' 

'  1 

P 

M 

P 

f 

R  i 

? 

s  ££• 

Mechanics, 
Planetary  Theory, 
Lunar  Theory,  &c.,  &c. 

Elasticity,  Plasticity,  Cohesion, 
Sound,  Crystallography,  ' 
Figure  of  the  Earth,  Hydromecha 
Aeromechanics,  Theory  of  the  Tidt 
Kinetic  Theory  of  Gases,  &c.,  &c. 

Theoretical  Chemistry, 
Spectrum  Analysis, 
Solar  and  Sidereal  Physics,  &c. 

if 
•I 

In  association 
with  Molecule. 

Evolution  of  Planetary  System, 
Evolution  of  the  Earth. 
Geology, 
Geography  (sometimes  termed  Phys> 
Meteorology, 
Mineralogy, 
Chemistry, 
&c.,  &c. 

1 

(T    ^ 

Light,  Heat.  E 
(in  relation  to 
Theories  of  Dis 
Conduction,  6 

*jr 

Hf 

Mil 

S 

I 

'|| 

1 

1 

i 

^  n  S 

*'  H  H- 

3 

^J.i 

< 

2  ^ 

i-' 

r 

I 

JS 

THE   CLASSIFICATION    OF  THE   SCIENCES.        465 

§  8. — Concrete  Science. — Organic  Phenomena. 

We  now  turn  to  the  third  and  last  great  field  of 
knowledge,  namely,  that  division  of  Concrete  Science 
which  deals  with  Organic  Phenomena.  Its  branches 
are  frequently  summed  up  as  the  Biological  Sciences, 
although  the  term  Biology  itself  is  usually  applied  to 
a  subdivision.  If  we  attempt  to  subdivide  the  Bio- 
logical Sciences  into  Precise  and  Synoptic  groups,  we 
do  not  obtain  any  practically  valuable  division.  For, 
with  the  exception  of  certain  small  portions  of  one  or 
two  branches,  the  whole  of  the  Biological  Sciences 
would  fall  under  the  synoptic  category.  It  is  true 
that  certain  powerful  formulae  have  reduced  large 
parts  of  biological  science  from  a  rational  classifica- 
tion to  science  in  the  accurate  sense  of  the  word  ; 
but  the  description  of  organic  phenomena  by  aid  of 
conceptual  motions  (p.  330)  awaits  long  and  la- 
borious investigation  on  the  part  of  both  physicist  and 
biologist  before  much  progress  will  be  reported.  I 
shall  therefore  return  to  the  mode  of  subdivision 
we  adopted  in  the  case  of  that  branch  of  Abstract 
Science  which  deals  with  "  Special  Relations."  I 
shall  subdivide  Biological  Sciences  into  those  which 
deal  more  especially  with  space  or  the  localization 
of  life,  and  those  which  deal  more  especially  with 
time  or — as  in  the  case  of  organic  phenomena 
we  more  generally  term  the  discrimination  by  se- 
quence— with  growth.  In  the  first  subdivision  we  shall 
have  those  branches  of  science  which  deal  with  the 
Distribution  of  Living  Forms  (CJwrology]  and  study 
habits  in  relation  to  environment  (Ecology].  These 
form  the  major  portion  of  what  in  the  old  sense  was 
termed  Natural  History. 

Turning  to  the  second  subdivision  of  change  or 


466  THE   GRAMMAR  OF   SCIENCE. 

growth,  we  notice  that  these  may  be  either  recurring 
or  non-recurring.  Recurring  and  non-recurring 
changes  are  terms  which  of  course  have  only  refe- 
rence to  man's  perceptual  experience.  From  that 
standpoint  we  treat  the  evolution  of  complex  from 
simple  organisms  as  non-recurring,  but  in  the  starry 
universe  it  is  a  legitimate  inference  from  the  like 
known  to  the  like  unknown  (p.  72)  to  conceive  this 
evolution  to  be  going  on  whenever  a  planetary  system 
reaches  the  same  stage  of  its  development  as  the 
solar  system  at  present  has  reached.  Thus  the  evo- 
lution of  life  may  really  have  recurred  innumerable 
times,  and  so  our  division  is  only  a  practical  mode  of 
classifying  our  actual  perceptual  experience.  It  is  not 
to  be  taken  as  an  assertion  that  there  is  anything 
more  inconceivable  in  the  genesis  and  extinction  of 
organic  life  on  many  planets  than  in  the  birth  and 
death  of  many  men. 

Non-recurring  growth  we  speak  of  as  History, 
and  recurring  growth  as  Biology  in  the  narrower 
sense.  Biology  falls  into  two  main  divisions  :  Botany, 
dealing  with  plant  life,  and  Zoology  with  animal  life. 

Regarding  the  historical  group  of  sciences,  we  may 
treat  generally  of  all  life,  and  we  then  have  branches 
of  science  discussing  the  Evolution  or  Origin  of 
Species  (Phytogeny,  Paleontology,  &c.).  More  espe- 
cially dealing  with  man  we  have  the  Evolution  or 
Descent  of  Man.  This  evolution  may  be  considered 
in  different  phases,  although  these  phases  cannot 
be  kept  absolutely  apart  and  discussed  quite  inde- 
pendently. Thus  we  may  ask  how  the  physique 
of  man  has  developed,  and  find  an  answer  in  the 
measurement  of  skulls,  the  comparison  of  skeletons 
and  prehistoric  remains  of  the  human  form — in  Crani- 


THE   CLASSIFICATION    OF   THE   SCIENCES.        467 

ology  and  Anthropology  in  its  narrower  sense.  We 
may  next  inquire  how  man's  mental  faculties  have 
developed,  and  seek  knowledge  in  the  history  and 
structure  of  language,  in  the  evolution  of  man's 
mental  products,  or  in  Histories  of  Philosophy,  of 
Science,  and  of  Art,  &c.,  &c.  Lastly,  we  may  trace  the 
evolution  of  social  institutions,  and  see  instinctive  gre- 
garious habits  developing  into  customs  and  ultimately 
into  laws  and  institutions.  We  may  discuss  the  origin 
of  human  dwellings,  of  human  societies  and  states. 
Here  we  seek  aid  from  Arch&ology,  Folklore,  Anthro- 
pology in  its  wider  sense,  and  from  Histories  of  Cus- 
toms, of  Marriage,  of  Ownership,  of  Religions,  and  of 
Laws,  &c.,  &c. 

Next  examining  the  recurring  phases  of  growth 
or  Biology,  we  seek  to  describe  the  form  and  structure 
of  the  various  types  of  life  and  thus  reach  the  subject- 
matter  of  those  important  branches  of  biology, 
termed  Morphology,  Histology,  Anatomy,  &c.,  &c.  Or 
we  may  deal  more  especially  with  the  growth  and 
reproduction  of  living  forms.  We  want  to  describe 
the  origin  of  the  distinction  between  the  sexes,  and 
the  purposes  we  conceive  this  distinction  serves  in  the 
economy  of  living  forms  ;  then  we  wish  to  describe 
how  the  parent  hands  down  his  characteristics  to  the 
child,  and  how  the  new  life  itself  takes  its  origin  and 
develops  stage  by  stage.  These  topics  are  dealt  with 
in  the  Evolution  of  Sex,  the  Theory  of  Heredity  and 
Embryology. 

The  third  and  last  great  division  of  Biology  is  con- 
cerned with  \^Q  functions  and  actions  of  living  forms. 
If  we  deal  with  these  functions  and  actions  from  the 
physical  side,  and  investigate  the  process  of  life  as 
related  to  inorganic  forms,  we  have  a  wide  branch  of 


468 


THE  GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 


science  termed  Physiology.  The  mental  side  of  the 
functions  and  actions  of  living  forms  is  embraced  by 
Psychology.  General  Psychology  treats  of  the  develop- 


C.—  CONCRETE  SCIENCE.     Organic  Phenomena. 

SPACE 
(Locali- 
zation). 

TIME 
(Growth  or  Change). 

^^^ 

Non-recurring  Phases. 
History. 

Recurring  Phases. 

D.  ,„.,,   (Of  Plants,  Botany. 
Biology  |  Q{  Anima'1S)  Zoofosy. 

111 

General 
Evolution 

Special 
Evolution 

Form 
and 

Growth 
and 

Functions 
and 

its 

of  Species. 

of  Man. 

Structure. 

Reproduction. 

Actions. 

istribution  of  Living 
ion  to  Situation  and 
•y  (in  old  sense). 

Genesis  of  Life  (P 
Origin  of  Species. 
Theories  of  Natur 
£ 

9 

% 

Mental  Faculties. 

Social  Institutions. 

Morphology, 
Histology, 
Anatomy,  &c.,  &c 

Embryology, 
Theory  of  Sex, 
Theory  of  Heredii 

Physical. 

Mental. 

1 
t 

t 

§S 

"P  6*     ^ 

5« 

O 

en 

li 

|| 

t>  ^  jj;  ^  k 

p 

| 

pS'|. 

£§ 

p 

H- 

&J 

§*s 

I      | 

^  ^Q 

?«2'||i 

H 

^ 

8  §• 

^o       8 

5i* 

"Lsi  £*!*&• 

1 

Bt 

o 

~ 

1      t 

JP 

^lifep 

>5> 
> 

p 

•p 

I 

p 

p  |Ji  ||| 

1' 

- 

— 

It  !  l?l 

-ri 

| 

1 

\ 

~  ~  ia>§ 

p  \. 

^ 

§ 

IF?  S-. 

1-'  > 
& 

rs 

1 

S'   fc 

o 

1 

| 

3  a-f1 

S* 

f  || 

i 

kO 

|S> 

•? 

I 

B  ft  Si 

> 

r|-" 

THE  CLASSIFICATION   OF   THE   SCIENCES.        469 

ment  of  mental  powers  in  life  generally,  of  the  origin 
of  consciousness,  animal  intelligence,  and  theories  of 
instinct.  If  we  turn  to  the  Special  Psychology  of  man, 
we  may  either  consider  man  as  an  isolated  individual 
or  as  member  of  a  group.  The  former  branch  of 
Psychology  may  be  termed  Mental  Science  or  Psychics, 
and  deals  with  the  various  mental  phases  and  habits 
of  individual  man  and  the  relation  of  his  thinking 
faculty  to  the  physical  structure  of  his  brain.  The 
latter  branch  of  Psychology  dealing  with  men  in  the 
group  is  termed  Sociology,  and  is  concerned  with 
man's  social  products  and  institutions — it  falls  into 
such  branches  as  the  Science  of  Morals,  the  Science 
of  Politics,  Political  Economy  and  Jurisprudence. 

With  Sociology  we  conclude  our  enumeration  ot 
the  Biological  Sciences,  which  are  summarized  in  the 
scheme  on  the  opposite  page. 

§  9. — Applied  Mathematics  and  Bio-physics  as  Cross-Links. 

The  reader  might  conceive  that  our  classification 
was  now  completed,  but  there  still  remains  a  branch 
of  science  to  which  it  is  necessary  to  refer.  We  have 
seen  that  we  have  no  perceptual  experience  of  the 
genesis  of  the  living  from  the  lifeless,  although  it 
appears  to  be  a  reasonable  conceptual  formula  (p. 
413).  It  might  therefore  seem  that  no  definite  link 
between  the  two  branches  of  Concrete  Science,  be- 
tween the  Physical  and  Biological  Sciences  could  at 
present  be  forthcoming.  But  we  have  to  remember 
that  life  invariably  occurs  associated  with  sense- 
impressions  similar  to  those  of  lifeless  forms, 
organisms  appear  to  have  chemical  and  physical 
structure  differing  only  in  complexity  from  inorganic 
forms.  And  although  we  cannot  definitely  assert  that 


4/O  THE   GRAMMAR   OF   SCIENCE. 

life  is  a  mechanism  (p.4O4)  until  we  know  more  exactly 
what  we  mean  by  the  term  mechanism  as  applied 
to  organic  corpuscles,  there  still  seems  little  doubt 
that  some  of  the  generalizations  of  physics — notably 
the  great  principle  of  the  conservation  of  energy — do 
describe  at  least  part  of  our  perceptual  experience  of 
living  organisms.  A  branch  of  science  is  therefore 
needed  dealing  with  the  application  of  the  laws  of  in- 
organic phenomena,  or  Physics,  to  the  development 
of  organic  forms.  This  branch  of  science  which  en- 
deavours to  show  that  the  facts  of  Biology — of  Morph- 
ology, Embryology -and  Physiology — constitute  particular 
cases  of  general  physical  laws  has  been  termed  ^Eti- 
ology,,T  It  would  perhaps  be  better  to  call  it  Bio -physics. 
This  science  does  not  appear  to  have  advanced  very 
far  at  present,  but  it  not  improbably  has  an  im- 
portant future. 

Thus  just  as  Applied  Mathematics  link  Abstract 
Science  to  the  Physical  Sciences,  so  Bio-physics  attempt 
to  link  the  Physical  and  Biological  Sciences  together. 

Abstract  Science. 
Concrete  Science. 

L_ 

I  l 

Physics.     Biology. 
Bio-physics. 

Applied  Mathematics  and  Bio-physics  are  thus  the 
two  links  between  the  three  great  divisions  of  science, 
and  only  when  their  work  has  been  fully  accom- 
plished, shall  we  be  able  to  realize  von  Helmholtz's  pre- 
diction and  conceive  all  scientific  formulae,  all  natural 

1  From  the  Greek  otrtov,  a  cause.  The  name  does  not  seem  very 
aptly  chosen,  especially  as  it  has  a  very  definite  meaning  of  older  origin 
in  medical  practice. 


THE  CLASSIFICATION   OF  THE   SCIENCES.        4/1 

laws,  as  laws  of  motion  (p.  330).     This  goal  we  must, 
however,  admit  is  at  present  indefinitely  distant. 

§  10. — Conclusion. 

We  have  passed  hastily  and  superficially  across  the 
vast  field  of  knowledge,  omitting  doubtless  many 
things  and  misplacing  others.  But  still  even  this 
survey  will  not  have  been  fruitless  if  it  has  convinced 
the  reader  of  the  immense  variety  and  the  enormous 
range  of  facts  which  modern  science  is  called  upon  to 
classify  and  resume.  Here  before  us — it  may  be  but 
obscurely  and  as  from  behind  a  veil — we  see  the  wide 
heritage  of  science,  upon  which  hundreds  of  toilers  in 
many  countries  have  spent  their  best  years  and  their 
ripest  powers,  for  the  past  two  centuries — and  once  for 
centuries  two  thousand  years  before  these.  Here  we 
see  Egyptian  and  Greek,  American  and  European, 
alike  working  to  a  common  end,  alike  animated  by 
a  common  zeal,  by  the  same  steady  enthusiasm  of 
purpose.  Here  in  the  field  of  knowledge  we  have 
the  one  meeting-ground  for  all  ages  and  for  all 
nations  ;  here,  indeed,  age  and  nation  cease  to  be  ; 
names  like  those  of  Galilei  and  Keppler,  Newton 
and  Laplace,  Dalton  and  Faraday,  Linnaeus  and 
Darwin  have  become  household  words,  kindling 
admiration,  and  even  devotion,  wherever  civilized 
man  has  established  his  communities. 

How,  we  may  ask,  has  it  come  to  pass  that 
mankind  has  devoted  all  this  time  and  toil  in 
pursuit  of  knowledge — why  should  men  reverence 
the  great  pioneers  of  science  ?  The  answer  is  clear 
and  definite.  Man  has  mastered  all  other  forms 
of  life  in  the  struggle  for  existence  by  the  deve- 
lopment of  a  more  complex  perceptive  faculty  and 


4/2  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

a  more  perfect  reasoning  power.  In  the  capacity 
he  has  evolved  for  resuming  vast  ranges  of  phe- 
nomena in  brief  scientific  formulae,  in  his  knowledge 
of  natural  law,  and  the  foresight  this  knowledge 
gives  him  lie  the  sources  of  man's  victory  over 
other  forms  of  life,  from  the  brute  power  of  the  wild 
beast  to  the  subtle  power  of  the  microscopic  bacillus 
of  some  dread  disease.  As  the  bull  in  its  horns,  or 
the  eagle  in  its  wings,  so  man  proudly  rejoices  in  the 
strength  of  his  mental  powers,  for  they  it  is  which 
enable  him  to  hold  his  own  in  the  struggle  of  life. 

In  this  Grammar  I  have  endeavoured  to  emphasize 
this  side  of  science  and  scientific  law  ;  I  have  striven 
to  indicate  how  natural  law  is  a  product  of  the  human 
reason  and  how  the  correlated  growth  of  the  reasoning 
and  perceptive  faculties  in  man,  assisted  by  the  sur- 
vival of  the  fittest,  may  possibly  have  left  us  with  a 
normal  type  of  man  for  whom  only  that  is  perception 
which  can  be  reasoned  about,  and  for  whom  the 
reason  is  keen  enough  to  appreciate  and  analyze  what 
is  perceived  (p.  I25).1  Long  and  difficult  must  have 
been  the  evolution  by  which  these  results  have  been 
achieved  ;  but  they  ought  at  least  to  give  man  con- 
fidence in  his  own  powers  and  assurance  that  with 
further  growth  will  come  still  keener  perception  and 
still  greater  intellectual  grasp.  We  have  no  right  to 
assume  that  the  development  of  man  is  completed. 
On  the  contrary  we  have  every  right  to  infer  that  the 
drift  of  evolution  which  we  can  trace  from  primitive 

1  Man  certainly  fails  in  his  attempt  to  reason  about  things  he  does 
not  perceive — about  the  "beyond"  of  sense-impression.  We  have  no 
evidence,  however,  that  would  lead  us  to  infer  that  any  group  of  per- 
ceptions is  beyond  rational  analysis  now  or  after  more  complete 
classification. 


THE  CLASSIFICATION   OF   THE  SCIENCES.        4/3 

man  to  Aristotle,  and  from  Aristotle  to  the  scientist 
of  to-day,  will  continue  the  same,  at  least  as  long  as 
man's  physical  environment  is  not  materially  modi- 
fied. To  deny  that  our  perception  is  wider  and 
deeper,  and  that  our  analysis  is  more  subtle  than  that 
of  the  great  Greek  philosopher  is  to  deny  the  drift  of 
man's  past  evolution,  to  deny  all  that  gives  history 
its  deep  human  significance.  The  growth  of  know- 
ledge since  the  days  of  Aristotle  ought  to  be  sufficient 
to  convince  us  that  we  have  no  reason  to  despair  of 
man's  ultimately  mastering  any  problem  whatever  of 
life  or  mind,  however  obscure  and  difficult  it  may  at 
present  appear.  But  we  ought  to  remember  what 
this  mastery  means  ;  it  does  not  denote  an  explana- 
tion of  the  routine  of  perception  ;  it  is  solely  the 
description  of  that  routine  in  brief  conceptual  for- 
mulae. It  is  the  historical  resum^  not  the  transcen- 
dental exegesis  of  final  causes.  In  the  latter  we  are 
not — except  in  honest  confession  of  ignorance  and 
rational  definition  of  knowledge— one  whit  further 
advanced  than  Aristotle,  nay,  than  the  primitive 
savage.  The  experience  of  centuries,  we  might  hope, 
will  at  last  convince  the  speculative  that  "the  inqui- 
sition of  Final  Causes  is  barren,  and,  like  a  virgin 
consecrated  to  God,  produces  nothing."  I 

Our  grandfathers  stood  puzzled  before  problems 
like  the  physical  evolution  of  the  earth,  the  origin 
of  species,  and  the  descent  of  man  ;  they  were,  per- 
force, content  to  cloak  their  ignorance  with  time- 
honoured  superstition  and  myth.  To  our  fathers 
belongs  not  only  the  honour  of  solving  these  problems, 
but  the  credit  of  having  borne  the  brunt  of  that  long 
and  weary  battle  by  which  science  freed  itself  from 

1  Bacon :  De  Augmentis>  bk.  iii.  chap.  v. 


474  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE. 

the  tyranny  of  tradition.  Their  task  was  the  difficult 
one  of  daring  to  know.  We,  entering  upon  their 
heritage,  no  longer  fear  tradition,  no  longer  find  that 
to  know  requires  courage.  We  too,  however,  stand 
as  our  fathers  did  before  problems  which  seem  to  us 
insoluble — problems,  for  example,  like  the  genesis  of 
living  from  lifeless  forms,  where  science  has  as  yet  no 
certain  descriptive  formula,  and  perhaps  no  hope  in 
the  immediate  future  of  finding  one.  Here  we  have 
a  duty  before  us,  which,  if  we  have  faith  in  the  scien- 
tific method,  is  simple  and  obvious.  We  must  turn  a 
deaf  ear  to  all  those  who  would  suggest  that  we  can 
enter  the  stronghold  of  truth  by  the  burrow  of  super- 
stition, or  scale  its  walls  by  the  ladder  of  metaphysics. 
We  must  accomplish  a  task  more  difficult  to  many 
minds  than  daring  to  know.  We  must  dare  to  be 
ignorant.  Ignoramus^  laborandum  est. 

SUMMARY. 

An  individual  even  with  the  ability  of  Bacon  or  Spencer  must  fail  for 
want  of  specialists'  knowledge  to  classify  the  sciences  satisfactorily.  A 
group  of  scientists  might  achieve  much  more,  but  even  their  system 
would  only  have  temporary  value  as  the  position  of  a  science  relative  to 
other  changes  with  its  development.  This  point  is  illustrated  by  the 
Precise  and  Synoptic  Physical  Sciences. 

From  Bacon  we  learn  that  the  best  form  for  classification  is  that  of  a 
branching  tree,  but  from  Comte  that  there  is  in  reality  an  interdependence 
in  the  sciences,  so  that  a  clear  understanding  of  one  may  necessitate  a 
previous  study  of  several  others.  From  Spencer  we  may  adopt  the 
fundamental  distinction  between  Abstract  and  Concrete  Science,  or 
those  which  deal  respectively  with  the  modes  and  the  contents  of  percep- 
tion. We  then  find  three  fundamental  divisions  corresponding  to  the 
Abstract,  Physical,  and  Biological  Sciences  which  are  united  pair  and 
pair  by  Applied  Mathematics  and  Bio-physics. 


THE  CLASSIFICATION   OF   THE  SCIENCES.        4/5 

LITERATURE. 

BACON,  F. — De  Dignitate  et  Augmentis  Scientiarum  (London,  1623), 
and  Descriptio  Globi  Intellectuals  (1612).  Translations  will  be 
found  in  J.  Spedding  and  R.  L.  Ellis'  edition  of  The  Works  of 
Francis  Bacon,  vols.  iv.  and  v.  London,  1858. 

COMTE,  A. — System  of  Positive  Polity  (1854),  translated  by  Congreve, 
vol.  iv.  chap.  iii.  London,  1877. 

SPENCER,  H. — The  Classification  of  the  Sciences  (Hertford,  1864),  or, 
Essays,  Scientific,  .Political,  and  Speculative,  vol.  iii.  pp.  9-56. 
London,  1875. 


APPENDIX. 

NOTE   I. 
On  the  Principle  of  Inertia  and  "  Absolute  Rotation  "  (p.  343). 

CONSIDER  a  very  thin  straight  piece  of  material  string  AB. 
which  in  the  conceptual  limit  may  approach  a  straight  line. 
Let  C  and  D  be  two  adjacent  physical  points  of  this  line  which 
in  conception  may  approach  to  geometrical  points.  Now  sup- 
pose the  fact  observed  to  be  that  AB  remains  straight  and  dis- 
connected from  other  "  matter,"  but  that  we  are  ignorant  whether 
it  is  really  in  motion  or  not.  Let  us  now  suppose  the  string 
separated  between  C  and  D,  say  by 


A  CD  B 

a  pair  of  scissors,  without  immediately  altering  the  motion,  if 
there  be  such.  One  of  two  things  may  now  occur — either  the 
pieces  AC,  DB  continue  to  appear  as  parts  of  one  unbroken  piece 
of  string  AB,  or  else  AC  and  DB  begin  to  separate  between  C  and 
D.  Now  the  only  thing  of  which  we  have  destroyed  the  possi- 
bility is  clearly  a  mechanical  relation — a  tension  (p.  365)  between 
the  material  points  C  and  D.  Hence,  if  the  parts  begin  to  separate 
after  the  application  of  the  scissors,  C  and  D  must  have  had  a  ten- 
sion between  them,  or  have  exerted  mutual  accelerations  before 
the  cutting  in  twain  (p.  360).  That  is  to  say,  D  must  initially 
have  had  an  acceleration  relative  to  C  in  the  direction  AB.  Or 
we  may  assert,  that  in  the  limit  two  parts  of  a  material  line  will 
tend  after  division  to  separate  or  not  to  separate  according  as 
its  parts  have  a  relative  acceleration  in  the  direction  of  its  length. 
Now  if  we  suppose  the  string  or  material  line  incapable  of 


478  APPENDIX. 

stretching,  it  is  clear  that  D  cannot  initially  have  a  velocity 
relative  to  C  in  the  direction  AB.  Hence  it  follows  that  the 
acceleration  of  D  relative  to  C  must  be  of  the  nature  of  normal 
acceleration  (p.  269),  or  the  line  AB  must  be  spinning  as  a  whole 
round  some  axis.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  parts  AC  and  DB 
remain  after  being  cut  in  twain  in  the  same  straight  line,  then  no 
material  particle  C  of  AB  has  any  acceleration  relative  to  an- 
other particle  D  in  the  direction  AB.  In  this  case  the  line  AB 
may  have  motion  of  translation  as  a  whole,  but  has  no  spin. 

A  line,  the  points  of  which  are  conceived  as  having  no  rela- 
tive accelerations  in  the  direction  of  the  line,  is  denned  as 
having  a  fixed  direction  in  space.  Perceptually  a  material 
straight  line,  string  or  wire,  removed  from  the  influence  of  other 
matter,  is  to  be  represented  on  the  conceptual  model  by  a  line 
"  fixed  in  direction,"  provided  that  when  it  is  cut  in  twain  there 
is  no  tendency  for  its  parts  to  separate,  or  they  still  appear  as 
the  parts  of  a  continuous  material  straight  line. 

Given  a  perceptual  body,  which  can  be  conceptually  repre- 
sented as  rigid,  how  are  we  to  ascertain  whether  it  is  to  be  con- 
ceived as  spinning  or  not  ?  For  example,  is  the  earth  rotating 
about  its  axis,  or  is  the  whole  vault  of  the  heavens  itself  turning 
round — which  will  best  enable  us  to  describe  our  perceptual  ex- 
perience ?  The  answer  lies  in  determining  whether  a  line  drawn 
perpendicular  to  the  axis  of  the  earth  is  to  be  conceived  as  "  fixed 
in  direction  "  or  not.  Theoretically  we  might  determine  the  pro- 
blem of  the  earth's  rotation  in  the  following  manner.  Fix  perpen- 
dicular to  the  axis  of  the  earth  a  wire,  the  parts  of  which  are  not 
subjected  to  gravitation  or  to  the  resistance  of  the  atmosphere, 
and  observe  on  its  being  divided  whether  the  parts  remain  the 
continuous  parts  of  a  material  line  or  not.  This  experiment  would 
of  course  be  impossible,  but  it  may  bring  to  the  reader's  mind 
what  Newton  understands  by  absolute  rotation.  The  effect, 
however,  of  the  relative  acceleration  of  the  parts  of  the  earth, 
if  it  exists,  may  be  measured  in  other  ways.  For  example,  it 
would  lead  to  an  apparent  lessening  of  gravitational  acceleration 
at  the  equator,  and,  if  the  earth  were  not  quite  rigid,  to  a  flat- 
tening at  the  poles.  When,  therefore,  without  rearranging  any 
other  portions  of  gross  "  matter  "  we  can  have  a  body  in  two 
states,  in  the  one  of  which  no  mere  division  of  the  parts  leads 
to  discontinuity  of  the  body  as  a  whole,  and  in  the  other  mere 
division  does  lead  to  discontinuity,  then  in  the  latter  case  we 


APPENDIX.  479 

suppose  that  there  will  be,  and  in  the  former  case  that  there  will 
not  be  relative  acceleration  of  the  parts.  When  this  relative 
acceleration  of  the  parts  manifests  itself,  although  the  elementary 
parts  may  have  no  relative  velocity  in  the  line  joining  them,  we 
can  describe  it  by  aid  of  a  spin  about  some  axis.  Since  this 
spin  does  not  seem  to  have  reference  to  any  external  system, 
Newton  termed  it  absolute  motion  of  rotation.  The  name 
is  an  unfortunate  one,  as  it  suggests  the  possibility  of  an 
absolute  motion  (p.  247).  What  we  have  to  deal  with  are  per- 
ceptual facts  which  can  only  be  conceptually  described  by  sup- 
posing points  at  different  distances  from  the  earth's  axis  to  have 
different  velocities  relative  to  the  stellar  system.  The  fixity  of 
direction  in  a  line  which  we  have  conceptually  defined  by 
absence  of  mutual  acceleration  between  its  parts,  appears  to 
coincide  with  fixity  of  direction  relative  to  the  stars,  but  it  must 
be  remembered  that  Galilei  first  stated  the  principle  of  inertia 
for  bodies  moving  with  regard  to  the  earth,  because  the  motion 
of  the  earth  relative  to  the  stars  was  insensible  for  most  motions 
at  its  surface.  It  in  no  way  follows  that  Newton's  extension  of 
the  principle  to  the  planetary  system  leads  us  to  an  absolute 
motion  in  an  absolute  space. 

It  has  been  asserted  that  Newton's  rotating  bucket  of  water 
and  Foucault's  pendulum  *  demonstrate  an  absolute  rotation  in 
an  absolute  space,  but  in  the  words  of  Professor  Mach  2 : — 

"  The  universe  is  not  presented  to  us  twice,  with  resting  and 
again  with  rotating  earth,  but  only  once  with  its  alone  deter- 
minable  relative  motions.  Accordingly  we  cannot  say  what 
would  happen  if  the  earth  did  not  rotate.  We  can  only  inter- 
pret the  case  as  it  is  presented  to  us  in  different  ways.  When 
we  interpret  it  so  that  we  are  involved  in  a  contradiction  with 
experience,  then  we  have  interpreted  it  falsely.  The  funda- 
mental principles  of  mechanics  can  indeed  be  so  conceived  that 
even  for  relative  rotations  centrifugal  forces  arise. 

''  The  experiment  of  Newton's  with  the  rotating  bucket  of 
water  only  teaches  us  that  the  rotation  of  the  water  relative  to 
the  side  of  the  bucket  gives  rise  to  no  sensible  centrifugal  forces, 
but  that  these  forces  do  arise  from  the  rotation  relative  to  the 
mass  of  the  earth  and  the  other  heavenly  bodies.  Nobody  can 

1  Maxwell,  Matter  and  Motion,  pp.  88-92. 

*  Die  Mechanik  in  ihrer  Entwickelung,  p.  216. 


480  APPENDIX. 

say  how  the  experiment  would  turn  out  if  the  sides  of  the  bucket 
became  thicker  and  more  massive  till  they  were  ultimately 
several  miles  thick.  There  is  only  the  one  experiment,  and  we 
have  to  bring  the  same  into  unison  with  other  facts  known  to  us 
and  not  with  our  arbitrary  imaginings." 

Allowing  for  the  difference  in  terminology  between  Professor 
Mach's  sentences  and  our  Grammar,  they  show,  .1  think,  how  far 
it  is  safe  to  go  in  the  idea  of  absolute  direction  and  absolute 
motion.  In  the  conceptual  model  we  may  define  lines,  which 
are  conceived  as  having  no  relative  acceleration  of  their 
parts,  as  "  fixed  in  direction."  Take  two  points  O  and  P  in  con- 
ceptual space  ;  let  the  step  OP  be  drawn  from  O,  whether  O 
be  in  motion  or  not,  and  let  OP  be  supposed  to  remain  "  fixed 
in  direction ;  "  the  tops  P  of  such  steps  drawn  for  all  instants 
form  the  path  of  P  relative  to  O.  The  statement  that,  if  O  and 
P  represent  particles  of  gross  matter  sufficiently  far  apart  from 
each  other  and  from  other  particles,  this  path  will  be  a  straight 
line,  is  the  principle  of  inertia. 

The  perceptual  equivalent  for  "  fixity  of  direction  "  in  the  con- 
ceptual step  was  in  Galilei's  day  J  represented  with  sufficient 
approximation  by  direction  fixed  with  regard  to  the  earth  ;  since 
Newton  we  take  it  to  sensibly  coincide  with  direction  fixed  with 
regard  to  the  stars.  But  perceptual  absoluteness  cannot  really 
be  asserted  even  in  the  latter  case.  Should  the  element  of 
gross  "matter,"  however,  be  ultimately  conceived  as  a  form 
of  ether  in  motion,  the  principle  of  inertia  will  become  a  far 
more  easily  stated  and  appreciated  axiom  of  mechanics  (p.  344, 
footnote}. 

NOTE  II. 

On  Newton's   Third  Law  of  Motion  (pp.   347,  360,  368,  and 

385). 

WE  have  seen  on  p.  359  that  one  fundamental  part  of  Newton's 
third  law  is  involved  in  mutual  accelerations  being  inversely  as 
masses.  This  leads  at  once  to  the  equality  in  magnitude  of 
action  and  reaction.  In  the  next  place  we  conceive  mutual 
accelerations  to  be  parallel  and  opposite  in  sense  (p.  346). 

1  And  even  now  by  the  writers  of  elementary  text-books  who  cite 
bodies  projected  along  the  surface  of  "  dry,  well-swept  ice  "  as  moving 
in  "  straight  lines  "  and  illustrating  Newton's  first  law  of  motion  ! 


APPENDIX.  481 

This  does  not,  however,  give  us  completely  Newton's  third  law 
as  it  is  usually  interpreted,  unless  we  suppose  these  mutual 
accelerations  to  be  in  the  same  straight  line  as  well  as  parallel. 
Jn  the  case  of  particles  this  straight  line  is  usually  taken  to  be 
the  straight  line  joining  them. 

Now  it  is  not  at  all  improbable  that  the  mutual  accelerations 
(and  therefore  the  mutual  forces)  which  are  ascribed  to  cor- 
puscles, will  be  ultimately  found  to  be  better  described  by  aid 
of  the  disregarded  kinetic  energy  of  an  intervening  ether. 
For  example,  oscillating  and  pulsating  bodies  in  a  perfect  fluid 
ether  have  mutual  accelerations,  which  may  be  described  by 
action  at  a  distance,  but  are  really  due  to  the  kinetic  energy  of 
the  intervening  ether.  In  the  case  of  two  small  bodies  moving 
with  velocities  of  translation  or  oscillating  in  such  an  ether  it 
by  no  means  follows  that  the  mutual  accelerations  (or  the 
apparent  action  and  reaction)  will  necessarily  lie  in  the  same 
straight  line,  and  if  they  do,  that  this  straight  line  will  be  the 
line  joining  the  small  bodies.  Further,  on  the  supposition  that 
apparent  action  at  a  distance  is  due  to  the  direct  action  of  the 
ether,  it  does  not  seem  likely  that,  if  a  corpuscle  P  be  suddenly 
moved,  the  result  of  this  motion  will  be  immediately  felt  by  a 
distant  corpuscle  O,  time  would  be  required  to  make  the  change 
in  the  position  of  P  felt  at  Q.  The  mutual  actions  might  in  this 
case  be  parallel,  but  it  is  hardly  probable  that  they  would  always 
be  in  the  same  straight  line,  that  is  opposite  in  Newton's  sense. 
Thus  these  considerations,  taken  in  conjunction  with  those 
referred  to  on  p.  368  et  seq.,  suggest  that  greater  caution  is 
necessary  than  is  sometimes  observed  in  extending  Newton's 
third  law  to  molecules  or  atoms,  which  may  really  have  con- 
siderable oscillatory  or  translatory  velocities  relative  to  the 
ether.  For  the  comparatively  small  velocities  of  particles  of 
gross  "matter,"  the  law  is  probably  a  sufficient  description  of 
our  perceptual  experience. 

NOTE  III. 
Wittiam  of  Occam's  Razor  (pp.  1 10  and  450). 

IN  the  course  of  our  work  we  have  frequently  had  occasion  to 
notice  the  unscientific  process  of  multiplying  existences  beyond 
what  are  really  needful  to  describe  phenomena.  The  canon  of 

32 


482  APPENDIX. 

inference  which  forbids  this  is  one  of  the  most  important  in  the 
whole  field  of  logical  thought.  It  has  been  very  concisely 
expressed  by  William  of  Occam  in  the  maxim  :  Entia  non  sunt 
multiplicanda  praeter  necessitate™.  Sir  William  Hamilton  in  a 
valuable  historical  note  (Discussions  on  Philosophy,  2nd  edition, 
pp.  628-31,  London,  1853)  quotes  the  further  scholastic  axioms  : 
Principia  non  sunt  cumulanda  and  Frustra  sit  per  plura  quod 
fieri  potest  per  pauciora.  So  far  these  axioms  are  valuable  as 
canons  of  thought,  they  express  no  dogma  but  a  fundamental 
principle  of  the  economy  of  thought.  When,  however,  Sir 
William  Hamilton  adds  to  them  Natura  horret  superfluum,  and 
says  that  they  only  embody  Aristotle's  dicta  that  God  and 
Nature  never  operate  superfluously  and  always  through  one 
rather  than  a  plurality  of  causes,  then  it  seems  to  me  we  are 
passing  from  the  safe  field  of  scientific  thought  to  a  region  thickly 
strewn  with  the  pitfalls  of  metaphysical  dogma.  Aristotle  and 
Newton's  opinion  that — Natura  enim  simplex  est  is  of  the  same 
character  as  Euler's  Mundi  universi  fabrica  enim  perfectissima 
est.  They  either  project  the  notions  of  "simple"  and  "perfect" 
beyond  the  sphere  of  sense-impression,  where  alone  there  is  any 
meaning  to  the  word  knowledge,  or  else  they  confuse  the  percep- 
tual universe  with  man's  scientific  description  of  it.  In  the  latter 
field  only  is  economy  of  principles  and  causes  a  true  canon  of 
scientific  thought.  On  this  account  the  "  law  of  parsimony," 
as  Sir  William  Hamilton  has  termed  it,  seems  a  product  of 
scholastic  thought  arid  not  due  to  Aristotle.  As  stated  by 
Occam,  it  is  a  far  more  valid  axiom  than  in  Newton's  version 
(p.  1 10),  and  I  think  it  might  well  be  called  after  the  Venerabilis 
Inceptor,  who  first  recognized  that  knowledge  beyond  the  sphere 
of  perception  was  only  another  name  for  unreasoning  faith. 

Sir  William  Hamilton  expresses  Occam's  canon  in  the  more 
complete  and  adequate  form  :— 

Neither  more,  nor  more  onerous,  causes  are  to  be  assumed,  than 
are  necessary  to  account  for  the  phenomena. 

NOTE  IV. 
On  the  Vitality  of  Seeds  (p.  400). 

THE  determination  of  the  maximum  period  during  which  seeds 
will  maintain  their  vitality  appears  to  be  very  far  from  settled- 


APPENDIX.  483 

In  the  first  place,  experiments  lasting  thirty,  fifty,  or  one  hundred 
years  cannot  be  rapidly  executed,1  and  secondly,  well-authenti- 
cated cases  of  the  discovery  of  seeds  several  score  years  or 
even  centuries  old  are  not  very  frequent.  There  seems,  how- 
ever, little  doubt  of  seeds  preserving  their  power  of  germination 
for  periods  of  forty  to  fifty  and  even  to  one  hundred  and  fifty 
years  (British  Association  Report,  1850,  p.  165  ;  Darwin, 
Origin  of  Species ;  4th  edition,  p.  430 ;  Alph.  de  Candolle, 
Geographic  botanique  raisonnte,  1855,  p.  542).  With  regard  to 
still  longer  periods  the  evidence  is  by  no  means  so  satisfactory 
as  might  be  wished.  Either  the  finder  is  an  archaeologist  and 
not  a  scientific  botanist,  or  if  the  seeds  have  really  fallen  into 
the  hands  of  a  genuine  biologist  the  finder  may  have  been  a 
questionable  archeeologist.  In  most  cases  the  combined  evi- 
dence of  ancient  origin  and  of  actual  germination  fails  to  reach 
the  point  of  legal  testimony.  The  botanical  evidence  is  doubt- 
less complete  in  the  case  of  Lindsay's  raspberries,  but  whether 
the  antiquarian  evidence  of  their  being  found  in  the  stomach 
of  a  man  buried  in  Hadrian's  reign  is  equally  convincing  may 
be  doubted.  In  other  cases  the  seeds  may  indeed  have  been 
genuine,  taken  by  archaeologists  quite  above  suspicion,  yet  we 
find  that  it  has  been  merely  handed  over  to  gardeners,  "thrown 
out  and  found  to  grow,"  or  even  asserted  by  eminent  botanists 
without  trial  or  after  an  inspection  with  the  microscope  to  be 
incapable  of  germinating.  The  question  whether  seeds  taken 
from  tombs  (rather  than  from  mummy  wrappings)  or  from  con- 
siderable distances  below  the  surface  of  the  soil  might  not 
germinate  after  many  centuries  seems  still  an  unsettled  one, 
The  point  in  the  text,  on  p.  400,  is  sufficiently  illustrated  by  the 
known  periods  of  fifty  to  a  hundred  years.3 

NOTE  V. 

A.  R.   Wallace  on  Matter. 
PERHAPS  a  maximum  of  confusion  between  our  perceptions 

1  Experiments  are  at  present  being  made  at  Kew  with  seeds  buried 
in  bottles, 

2  Samples  of  the  tales  arid  the  opinions  which  pass  for  evidence  will 
be  found  in  J.  Philipson's  article  :   The   Vitality  of  Seeds  found  in  tht 
Wrappings  of  Egyptian  Mummies,  Archaeologia  ^Eliana,  vol.  xv.,  1890; 


484  APPENDIX. 

and  conceptions  is  reached  in  Mr.  Alfred  Russel  Wallace's 
discussion  of  Matter  in  his  Natural  Selection.  It  would  not  be 
needful  to  refer  to  this  feeble  contribution  of  a  great  naturalist 
to  physical  science,  had  he  not  recently  republished  it  without 
any  qualifying  remarks  (Natural  Selection  and  Tropical  Nature ', 
pp.  207-14.  London,  1891).  According  to  Mr.  Wallace  matter 
is  not  a  thing-in-itself.  but  is  force,  and  all  force  is  probably 
will-force.  It  is  unnecessary  here  to  again  remark  on  the  ille- 
gitimate inference  made  in  this  extension  of  the  term  will 
(p.  70).  But  as  force  is  only  evidenced  in  change  of  motion,  we 
may  well  ask  what  it  is  which  Mr.  Wallace  supposes  to  move. 
If  he  is  talking  of  the  perceptual  sphere,  he  fails  to  distinguish 
between  our  appreciation  of  individual  groups  of  sense-impres- 
sions and  of  change  in  these  groups,  or  indeed  between  percep- 
tions and  the  routine  of  perception.  If  he  is  talking  of  the 
conceptual  sphere  he  fails  to  distinguish  between  the  moving 
ideals  (geometrical  bodies,  points,  or  Boscovich's  "  centres  of 
force")  and  the  modes  of  their  motion.  As  a  matter  of  fact  he 
uses  force  for  sense-impression,  for  sequence  of  sense-impressions, 
for  moving  ideal,  and  for  mode  of  motion.  From  this  confusion 
of  the  perceptual  and  the  conceptual  are  drawn  arguments  for 
spiritism,  exactly  as  Aristotle,  the  Stoics,  and  Martineau  have 
drawn  them  for  animism  (pp.  106  and  146).  The  chief  difference 
between  Mr.  Wallace  and  his  predecessors  lies  in  the  fact  that 
he  has  polytheistic  rather  than  monotheistic  sympathies. 


NOTE  VI. 

On  the  Sufficiency  of  Natural  Selection  to  Accotmt  for  the 
History  of  Civilized  Man  (p.  430). 

IT  is  not  only  literary  historians,  but  even  naturalists  who  deny 
that  natural  selection  is  a  sufficiently  powerful  factor  to  describe 
the  development  of  civilized  man.  The  most  noteworthy 
scientist  who  takes  this  view  is  Mr.  Alfred  Russel  Wallace.  He 
considers  that  (i.)  the  large  brain  of  man,  (ii.)  his  naked  skin, 
(iii.)  his  voice,  hands,  and  feet,  (iv.)  his  moral  sense,  could  never 
have  been  produced  by  natural  selection.  He  holds  that  all 
these  characteristics  are  more  fully  developed  in  the  savage 
than  are  necessary  for  his  needs.  He  believes,  however,  that 
they  have  been  developed  in  man  by  selection,  as  man  himself 


APPENDIX.  485 

has  developed  other  characteristics  in  the  Guernsey  milch  cow. 
In  other  words  he  asserts  that  they  are  the  outcome  of  the 
artificial  selection  of  some  intelligent  power  and  not  of  blind 
natural  selection.  This  theory  of  Mr.  Wallace's  has  been  well 
described  by  the  phrase  "  man  as  God's  domestic  animal."  Mr. 
Wallace,  however,  being  polytheistic  in  conviction,  has  objected 
to  the  capital  G  in  this  phrase,  and  appears  to  hold  that  man  is 
the  domestic  animal  of  the  modern  equivalents  of  angels  and 
demons.  According  to  him,  therefore,  "  marriages  are  made  in 
heaven,"  but  by  the  lesser  luminaries  of  the  spirit  hierarchy.  No 
arguments  in  favour  of  the  interference  of  this  spirit  hierarchy  are 
produced  except  the  supposed  insufficiency  of  natural  selection. 
The  difficulties  Mr.  Wallace  finds  in  natural  selection  do  not 
appear  of  a  very  formidable  character,1  but  surely  if  they  were  im- 
portant enough  to  leave  us  in  doubt  as  to  whether  we  had  found 
a  sufficiently  wide-embracing  formula  in  natural  selection,  then 
the  true  scientific  method  is  to  remain  agnostic,  until  it  has  been 
shown  that  no  other  sufficient  perceptual  formula  can  be  found  ? 
Mr.  Wallace  rushes  with  such  haste  to  his  spirit  hierarchy,  that 
his  pages  read  as  if  he  had  invented  his  difficulties  in  order  to 
justify  his  beliefs,  and  not  reached  his  "angel-made  marriages" 
by  a  process  of  elimination,  which  left  no  other  formula  possible. 
I  have  added  this  Note  that  the  reader  may  not  think  that  I 
have  disregarded  Mr.  Wallace's  views  on  the  inapplicability  of 
natural  selection  to  the  history  of  man.  Such  is  far  from  being 
the  fact,  but  I  hold  that  Mr.  Wallace's  views  as  expressed  in  the 
chapter  (pp.  186-214)  on  The  Limits  of  Natural  Selection  as 
applied  to  Man  in  the  recently  republished  "Natural  Selection," 
and  in  the  chapter  on  Darwinism  applied  to  Man  in  the  "  Dar- 
winism," will  appear  paralogistic  enough  to  confute  themselves 
if  carefully  studied. 

1  His  whole  argument,  for  example,  with  regard  to  the  brain  turns 
upon  its  size,  whereas  it  appears  that  it  is  the  complexity  of  its  convolu- 
tions and  the  variety  and  efficiency  of  its  commissures  rather  than  its 
actual  size,  which  we  should  psychologically  expect  to  have  grown  with 
man's  civilization. 


INDEX. 


ACCELERATION,  345-351  ;  as  a 
spurt  and  a  shunt,  265-268  ;  nor- 
mal (shunt),  276  ;  in  the  direction 
of  motion  (spurt),  276 

Action,  principle  of  modified,  376 

Adams,  J.  C,  199 

Aeromechanics,  462 

Agnostic,  26 

Alchemy,  27 

Allen,  Grant,  "  Force  and  Energy," 
108 

Anatomy,  467 

Anomy,  a  breach  in  the  routine  of 
perceptions,  114,  172,  177 

Anthropology,  467 

Aristotle,  146-148,  161,  230,  473, 
474,  482,  484 

Archaeology,  467 

Aspect,  354,  375  ;  on  change  of, 
239-242 

Astronomy,  460 

Atavism,  125 

Atom,  298,  299,  302-307  ;  an  intel- 
lectual conception,  115  ;  (chemi- 
cal) diagrammatically  represented, 
337;  ether-squirt,  316-319;  vor- 
tex-ring, 316-319  ;  see  Prime 
Atom 

Austin,  94-98,  104,  105,  111-113; 
"  Lectures  on  Jurisprudence," 
94,  135 

Bacon,  Francis,  39,  444-448;  his 
classification  of  the  sciences,  445  ; 
"  Intellectual  Globe,"  443,  475  ; 
"  Jnstauratio  Magna,"  443  ; 


"  Novum  Organum,"  39,  45  ; 
"  Of  the  Dignity  and  Advance- 
ment of  Learning,"  386, 443,  445, 

474.  475 
Bain,  449 
Ball,  W.  P.,  "Are  the  Effects  of 

Use  and  Disuse  Inherited  ?"  31 
Ball,  "  Story  of  the  Heavens,"  189 
Basset,   A.    B.,    "A    Treatise    on 

Hydrodynamics,"  344 
Bastian,  H.  C,  "The  Brain  as  an 

Organ  of  Mind,"  442 
Bearing,    involves     conception     of 

direction  and  sense,  249,  262 
Belief,   use  of  the  word  changing, 

71 ;  as  an  adjunct  to  knowledge,  72 
Beltrami,  322 
Berkeley,   83,    93,    122;    "Theory 

of  Vision,"  91  ;    "  Principles  of 

Human  Knowledge,"  91 ;  "Hylas 

and  Philonous,"  91 
Biology,  450,  465  ;  relation  of,   to 

physics,  388-392 
Bio-physics,  469-70 
Bois-Raymond,  E.  du,  26,  329, 

330;    "  Ueber  die   Grenzen  des 

Naturerkennens,"  46,  330 
Bois-Raymond,    P.    du,    26,    119, 

329 ;    "  Ueber    die    Grundlagen 

der  Erkenntniss  in  den  exacten 

Wissenschaften,"  26,  46 
Boole,    "An   Investigation  of  the 

Laws  of   Thought,"    174,    177, 

180  ;  on  problems  relating  to  the 

connexion  of  causes  and   effects, 

'74 


488 


INDEX. 


Botany,  466 
Boscovich,  325,  484 
Bradlaugh,  C.,  354 
Bramhall,  114 
Brown-Sequard,  66 
Biichner,  87,  353,  354 
Burmester,    "  Lehrbuch   der   Kine- 
matik,"  458 


Calculus,  differential,  456  ;  integral, 

456 

Candolle,  A.  de,  483 

Cauchy,  350 

Carnelly,  Dr.,  negative  atoms,  319 

Carpenter,  on  will,  146 

Cause,  force  as  a,  140-143  ;  meta- 
physical conception  of,  146  ; 
scientific  conception  of,  146 ; 
scientific  definition  of,  155  ;  will 
as  a,  143-144 

Causation,  136  ;  is  uniform  ante- 
cedence, 156 

Chart,  time,  253-257 

Chemistry,  461 

Chorology,  465 

Cicero,  "De  Legibus,"  106 

Clausius,  "Die  mechanische  Warm- 
theorie,"  350 

Claus  and  Sedgwick,  "  Elementary 
Text-Book  of  Zoology,"  439 

Clerk-Maxwell,  36,  100,  101,  335  ; 
article,  "Atom,"  318,  331,  334  ; 
article,  "Ether,"  331;  "Consti- 
tution of  Bodies,"  331  ;  "Matter 
and  Motion,"  284,  292,  387 ; 
"Scientific  Papers,"  318,  331; 
"  Theory  of  Heat,"  100 

Clifford,  W.  K.,  6,  45,  50,  60,  83, 
322,  323,  354;  "Common  Sense 
of  the  Exact  Sciences,"  245,  248, 
271,  284,  387;  "Elements  of 
Dynamic,"  245,  253,  258,  284; 
"Ethics  of  Belief,"  71  ;  "Lec- 
tures and  Essays,"  46,  60,  91, 
123,  230,  331  ;  "  Seeing  and 
Thinking,"  91,  230 

Cohesion,  462 

Comte,  Auguste,  443,  446,  448, 
452,  453,  475;  his  Hierarchy, 
446  ;  "  System  of  Positive 
Polity,"  447,  448,  475 


Conception,  scientific  validity  of  a, 
64-67  ;  must  be  deducible  from 
the  perceptions,  65 

Conscience,  tribal,  6,  7 

Consciousness,  as  the  field  of  science, 
63 ;  each  individual  recognizes 
his  own,  58 ;  evolution  of,  401  ; 
measure  of,  53  >  sense-impression 
does  not  involve,  53;  without 
sense-impression  there  would  be 
no,  63 ;  will  closely  connected 
with,  70 ;  see  "  Other-conscious- 
ness" 

Construct,  an  external  object  is  a, 
50-52,  77,  90 

Copernicus,  25,  118 

Corpuscle,  340-348 

Corpuscles  and  their  structure,  332- 

337 

Cousin,  Victor,  38 
Craniology,  467 
Crookes,  Protyle,  333,  423 
Crystallography,  462 
Curvature,  268-276;  radius  of,  273 

Darwin,  I,  2,  35,  37,  39,  40,  41,  67, 
370,  396,  397,  399. 422,  425,  433> 
472  ;  "  Descent  of  Man,"  13  ; 
"  Life  and  Letters  of,"  39  ; 
"  Origin  of  Species,"  13,  40,  483  ; 
"  Variation  of  Animals  and 
Plants  under  Domestication," 
396 

Dalton,  472 
De  Morgan,  A.,   "The  Theory  of 

Probabilities,"  180 
Density,  definition  of,  372 
Determinism,  mechanical,  278 
Dilatation,  definition  of,  243 
Direction,  when  "fixed,"  478-80 
Drummond,  "Natural   Law  in  the 
Spiritual  World,"  108 

Ecology,  465 

Edgworth,   175;  "The  Philosophy 

of  Chance,"  175,  180 
Eject,    Clifford's   definition   of,  60, 

91  ;    other-consciousness    as   an, 

59-61 
Ejects,  attitude  of  science  towards, 

61-63 
Elasticity,  462 


INDEX. 


489 


Electricity,  463 

Embryology,  467 

Energy,  Clerk- Maxwell's  definition 
of,  292  ;  conservation  of,  349, 
406  ;  degradation  of,  410 

Erasmus,  3 

Ether,  213-217,  310-316;  -element, 
328,332,  338-348,368,380,381; 
-mass,  368;  -matter,  312  ;  -motion, 
338>  369  5  -sink,  319  ;  -squirt,  319- 
322,  348,  375,  379;  -unit,  dia- 
grammatically  represented,  337 

Evolution,  Darwinian  theory  of, 
137,  421  ;  principles  of,  428-430 

Euler,  482 

Faraday,  37,  38,  41,  472;  "Ex- 
perimental Researches,"  13 

Fischer,  Kuno,  "  Geschichte  der 
Philosophic, "  230 

Fitzgerald,  G.  F.,  "  On  an  Electro- 
magnetic Interpretation  of  Turbu- 
lent Fluid  Motion,"  318 

Flatland  :  "a  Romance  of  Many 
Dimensions,"  321 

Force,  as  a  cause,  140-143  ;  defini- 
tion of,  360  ;  materialists'  notion 
of,  143  ;  redistribution  of,  451  ; 
resultant,  378  ;  Thomson  and 
Tait's  definition  of,  294 

Forces,  parallelogram  of,  378,  384 

Galilei,  24-26,  257,  366,  386,  472 
Galloway,     T.,    "A    Treatise    on 

Probability,"  177,  180 
Galvani,  35,  36 

Geddes,  "  Evolution  of  Sex,"  31 
Gemmule,  396-399 
Generation,  spontaneous,  390,  409, 

414,  419,  422 
Geography,  463 
Geology,  463 

Geometry,  descriptive,  456  ;  metri- 
cal, 456  ;  perspective,  456 
Germ-plasm,  31,  389,  397,  398 
Gladstone,  W.  E.,  287  ;  article  in 

the  "  Nineteenth  Century,"  137  ; 

"  The  Impregnable  Rock  of  Holy 

Scripture,"  137 
Gravitation,  law  of,   102-104,   IXI> 

119,  120,  145,  146,  161,336,  350; 

force  of,  326 


Green,  "General  Introduction"  to 
Hume's  works.  230 


Haeckel,  330,  404,  431,  432,  435  ; 
"  Freie  Wissenschaft  und  freie 
Lehre,"  46,  432,  440;  his  criti- 
cism of  Darwinism,  431-432  ; 
"  Natiirliche  Schopfungs  -  Ges  - 
chichte,"  440  ;  "  Of  the  Pedigree 
of  Man  and  other  Essays,"  440  ; 
"  On  the  Development  of  Life 
Particles  and  the  Perigenesis  of 
the  Plastidule,"  440 

Haldane,  J.  S.  and  R.  B.,  "  Life  and 
Mechanism,"  46 

Hamilton,  Sir  William,  482 

Harvey,  "  Anatomical  Dissertation 
on  the  Motion  of  the  Heart  and 
Blood,"  13 

Heat,  463 

Hegel,  20,  31,  34,  291  ;  "  Philo- 
sophy of  Law,"  96 

Helmholtz,  322,  330,  349,  411, 
471;  "On  the  Relation  of  the 
Natural  Sciences  to  the  Totality 
of  the  Sciences,"  46;  "Sensa- 
tions of  Tone,"  13 

Heraclitus,  285,  286 

Heredity,  Weismann's  theory  of,  31- 
34,  396, 467  ;  Darwin's  theory  of, 
396 

Herschel,  "A  Preliminary  Disser- 
tation on  Natural  Philosophy," 
46;  "Outlines  of  Astronomy' 
(Force  as  v/ill),  146 

Hertz,  36,  214 

Heterogeneity,  372 

Hipparchus,  117 

Histology,  467 

Hodograph,  the  velocity  diagram 
or,  262-265 

Homogeneity,  370 

Hooker,  R.,  107-112;  "Ecclesias- 
tical Polity,"  107,  108 

Humanism,  433 

Humanity,  Solidarity  of,  437,  438 

Ilumboldt,  A.  von,  16 

Hume,  93,  192,  193,  197;  "Dia- 
logues concerning  Natural  Re- 
ligion "  135  ;  "  Essay  concerning 
Human  Understanding,"  191, 


490 


INDEX. 


194;  "Treatise  on  Human 
Nature,"  197,  230 

Huxley,  26,  389,  432;  "Hume," 
91;  "  Lay  Sermons,"  440,  448; 
"  On  our  Knowledge  of  the 
Causes  of  the  Phenomena  of  Or- 
ganic Nature,"  440 

Hydromechanics,  462 

Ideal,  distinction  between  real  and, 

5° 

Imagination,  disciplined  use  of,  41  ; 

scientific  use  of,  38 
Individualism,  432-436 
Inertia,  principle  of,  342-345,  383, 

406,  477-8o 
Inference,  the  scientific  validity  of 

an,    67-69 ;    limits  of  legitimate, 

69  ;  canons  of  legitimate,  71-73 
Inheritance,  31,  396,  421 

Jevons,  Stanley,  39,  152,  166 ; 
"  Elementary  Lessons  in  Logic," 
178;  "Limits  of  Scientific 
Method,"  41 ;  "  Principles  of 
Science,"  41,  46,  67,  71,  152,  166, 
1 80 

Judgment,  aesthetic,  42-44  ;  scien- 
tific, 43 

Jurisprudence,  468 

Kant,     20,    50,    83;  "Kritik    der 

reinen  Vernunft,"  91,  230 
Keppler,  25,  118,  472 
Kinematics,  232,  246,  457 
Kinetic  Scale,  355,  373  ;  density  as 

the  basis  of  the,  370-374 
Kirchhoff,  35,  139,  287;  "Vorles- 

ungen  liber  mathematische   Phy- 

sik,"  139 

Lankester,  389,413 

Laplace,    39,    169,    170,     173-177, 

472 ;     "  Theorie     Analitque   des 

Probabilites,"  39,  180 
Laplace's   investigation,  nature   of, 

176,  177  ;  theory,  the  basis  of,  171- 

176 
Law,  Austin's  definition  of,  94,  95  ; 

Hooker's,  107;  natural,  93-108; 

scientific,    93-104;    sequence    of 

sense-impressions  not  in  itself  a, 


1 02  ;  the  Stoics'  conception  of, 
106 

Leibniz,  definition  of  space,  185 

Leverrier,  199 

Lewes,  G.  H.,  287;  "Aristotle," 
230,  288 

Life,  the  perpetuity  of  (Biogenesis), 
411-413;  the  spontaneous  gene- 
ration of  (Abiogenesis),  411-413: 
a  special  creation  of,  411 

Light,  463 

Linnaeus,  472 

Locke,  72,  194 

Logic,  449,  454,  458 

Lyell,  "  Principles  of  Geology,"  13 

Macgregor,  ' '  Kinematics  and  Dyna- 
mics," 245,  284 

Mach,  Ernst,  77,  78,  232;  "Analy- 
sis of  the  Sensations,  Anti-meta- 
physical," 79,  91  ;  "Beitrage  zur 
Analyse  der  Empfindungen,"  91  ; 
"  Die  Mechanik  in  ihrer  Entwick- 
lung>"  3^7  5  his  diagram,  78 ; 
"  Sensations  and  the  Elements 
of  Reality,"  91 

Magnetism,  463 

Malthus, "  Essay  on  Population,"  40 

Marriage,  428-430 

Martineau,  on  wiil,  146,  484 

Mass,  as  the  ratio  of  the  number  of 
units  in  two  accelerations,  358  ; 
centre  of,  382  ;  the  scientific  con- 
ception of,  357,  358 

Mathematics,  449  ;  applied,  461  ; 
pure,  458 

Matter,  as  non-matter  in  motion, 
310-313  ;  Clerk-Maxwell's  de- 
finition of,  292  ;  ether,  312  ; 
gross,  338-35 1,  368,  369,  379- 
383;  "heavy,"  312;  Hegel's 
definition  of,  291  ;  J.  S.  Mill's 
definition  of,  297  ;  Tait's  defini- 
tion of,  296  ;  Thomson  and  Tait's 
definition  of,  293 

Mayr,  Georg,  "  Die  Gesetzmassig- 
keit  im  Gesellschaftsleben,"  426 

Mechanics,  the  science  of  motion, 

139 

Mechanism,  136-140,  392-400;  the 

limits  to,  337-34° 
Metakinesis,  401-403 


INDEX. 


491 


Metaphysician,  definition  of,  20,  21 

Meteorology,  460-463 

Method,     philosophical,     22,     23  ; 

scientific,  8,  20,   28,  39-41,  45  ; 

methodology,  454 
Mill,  J.  S.,  39,  156;  "Canons  of 

Induction,"     178;    "System    of 

Logic,"  178,  1 80,  297 
Mineralogy',  461 

Molecule,  an  intellectual  concep- 
tion, 115;  definition  of,  210; 

diagrammatically  represented,  337 
Moleschott,  J.,  353 
Morals,  science  of,  468 
Morgan,  Lloyd,  401,  402  ;  "  Animal 

Life   and    Intelligence,"   31,   50, 

91,  101 

Morphology,  467 
Motion,  Newtonian  laws  of,  as  given 

by  Thomson  and  Tait,  381-384; 

criticism  of,  380-386  ;  third  law  of, 

480 

Nageli,  389 

Nerve,  motor,  52,  54;  sensory,  51, 

52,  54 

Newton,  35,  40,  41,  102,  103,  no, 
118-120,  145,  226,  258,  336,  360, 
370,    378,    379,    38i,.  382,   386, 
472,  477-81  ;  "  Principia,"  HO 
Newton's  Canon,  no,  482 
Newton,  R.  H.,  Social  Studies,  435 

Object — distinction  between  object 
and  eject,  60 

Object,  external,  the  stored  effect 
of  past  sense-impressions,  49  ;  as 
a  construct,  50  ;  actions  subject  to 
the  mechanical  control  of  the,  55 

Occam's  Razor,  481-2 

Other-consciousness  as  an  eject,  59- 
6 1  ;  possibility  of  physical  veri- 
fication of,  60 ;  the  limits  to, 
69-71  ;  recognition  of,  77 

Palaeontology,  466 

Paley,  153 

Pangenesis,  Darwin's  hypothesis  of, 

39° 

Parallelogram  Law,    253,    281  ;   of 
velocities,  282  ;  of  accelerations,    i 
282 


Parsimony,  law  of,  482 

Particle,  334  ;  diagrammatically  re- 

presented, 337 
Pearson,  K.,  "The  Ethic  of  Free- 

thought,"   46,    91  ;    ether-squirt, 


Perceptions,  conceptions  must  be  de- 
ducible  from,  65  ;  routine  in,  152 

Perceptive  faculty,  Nature  condi- 
tioned by  the,  176 

Philipson,  J.,  483 

Philosophy,  Hegelian,  21 

Physics,  atomic,  462  ;  molar,  461  ; 
molecular,  462  ;  sidereal,  462  ; 
solar,  462 

Phylogeny,  466 

Physiology,  468 

Plasticity,  462 

Plastidule,  Haeckel's,  404 

Plato,  31,  34,  114;  "The  Laws,"  114 

Point-motion,  247-250 

Poisson,  350 

Political  Economy,  468 

Politics,  Science  of,  468 

Position,  250-253 

Powell,  Sir  J.,  112 

Prime-atom,  as  an  ether  vortex- 
ring,  318;  diagrammatically  re- 
presented, 337  ;  the  fundamental 
element  of  heavy  matter,  313 

Protoplasm,  389,  390,  408 

Protyle,  or  prime-atom,  333,  423 

Psychics,  468 

Psychology,  468 

Ptolemy,  102,  117,  118 

Quetelet,  212 

Radian,  272 

Real,  47,  50,  77 

Reality,  73,  76,  77 

Reid,  Thomas,  183 

Riemann,  322 

Rigidity,  a  conceptual  limit,  238 

Ross  J.,  on  Aphasia,  442 

Rotation,     motion     of,     237  ;     on 

change    of   aspect   or,    239-242  ; 

Newton's  absolute,  477-80 
Routine,  162-166,  177-180 

Sandars,  T.  C,  "Institutes  of  Jus- 
tinian," 106 


492 


INDEX. 


Sanderson,  J.  S.  Burdon,  440 

Schopenhauer,  20,  83,  146,  148, 
326 

Schwegler,  "  Handbook  of  the 
History  of  Philosophy,"  230 

Science,  Abstract — scheme,  459  ; 
Concrete,  inorganic  phenomena — 
scheme,  464;  Concrete,  organic 
phenomena  —  scheme,  469  ;  de- 
scriptive, 140 ;  function  of,  8  ; 
goal  of,  17;  material  of,  15,  18; 
prescriptive,  140 ;  precise  and 
synoptic,  452,  461 

Seeds,  vitality  of,  400,  482-3 

Selection,  natural,  32,  39,  40,  67, 
96,  421,  422-428,  43°-434>  484-5 

"Sense,  "248 

Self-determination,  406 

Sense-impressions,  contents  of  our 
mind  based  on,  62;  exertion  as 
the  product  of,  55  ;  the  test  of 
identity  is  sameness  in,  87 

Sense-impresses,  action  conditioned 
by  stored,  55  '•>  memories  are 
stored,  51 

Shunt,  266 

Slide,  or  shearing  strain,  245 

Slope,  a  measure  of  steepness,  258; 
speed  as  a,  260 

Smith,  Robertson,  426 

Socialism,  433 

Sociology,  468 

Space,  189,  229  ;  a  mode  of  per- 
ceiving objects,  1 86 

Spectrum  Analysis,  462 

Speed,  uniform,  262  ;  variable, 
262  ;  as  the  slope  of  the  tangent, 
262 

Spencer,  Herbert,  I,  389,  404,  432, 
435,  443,  445,  44S-452,  454,  475  ; 
essays,  451  ;  his  classification, 
448-452 ;  his  use  of  the  term 
"force,"  389;  "Man  and  the 
State,"  440  ;  "  Principles  of  Bio- 
logy, 440 ;  "  Reasons  for  dis- 
senting from  the  philosophy  of  A. 
Comte,"  448  ;  "  The  Classifica- 
tion of  the  Sciences,"  450,  475 

Spin,  274 

Spiritualism,  28,  228 

Spurt,  266 

Steepness,  258 


Step,  249 

Stoics,  the,  106-112,  131,  132,  484 

Stokes,  Sir  G.  G.,  316,  318  ;  "  Bur- 
nett Lectures  on  Light,"  109, 
418;  "  Mathematical  and  Physical 
Papers,"  316 

Strain,  or  change  of  form,  242 

Stretch,  243 

Stuart,  J.,  160;  "A  Chapter  of 
Science,"  135,  160-162 

Supermateriality,  402,  403 

Supersensuousness,  114-116 

Swift,  298 

Tait,  Professor,  309,  327,  352,  384 ; 
"Dynamics  of  a  Particle,"  361  ; 
"  Properties  of  Matter,"  295,  296, 

327,  331 

Tangent,  definition  of,  259 

Tennyson,  156 

Tension,  365-367 

Theory,  lunar,  462  ;  nebular,  463 

Theory  of  description,  457  ;  of 
errors,  455 ;  of  functions,  455  ; 
of  gases,  kinetic,  462 ;  of  measure- 
ment, 455  ;  of  observation,  457; 
planetary,  462  ;  of  probability, 
455  ;  of  radiation,  463 ;  of  stati- 
stics, 455  J  of  strains,  458  ;  of 
the  tides,  462 

Theosophy,  228 

Thermodynamics,  second  law  of,  99, 
101 

Thing-in-itself,  87 

Thomson,  Sir  W.,  309,  316,  318, 
327,  384,  411  ;  "  Popular  Lectures 
and  Addresses,"  124,  167,  210, 
318,  331  ;"  The  Six  Gateways  of 
Knowledge,"  167;  vortex-atom 
theory,  318 

Thomson  and  Tait,  "  Treatise  on 
Natural  Philosophy,"  293,  295, 
327,  381,  387 

Thomson,  J.  A.,  "  Evolution  of 
Sex,"  31 

Time-chart,  255 

Time,  Newton's  definition  of  con- 
ceptual, 226  ;  perceptual,  227 

Todhunter,  "  History  of  the  Theory 
of  Probability,"  177,  180;  "His- 
tory of  Elasticity,"  379 

Translation,  motion  of,  237 


INDEX. 


493 


Trendelenburg,    230,    231;    "  Log- 

ische  Untersuchungen,"  231 
Tunzelmann,  von,  214 
Tin  got,  40 
Tycho  Brahe,  118 

Ueberweg,  "  History  of  Philosophy, " 

230 

Unit  (physiological),  Spencer's,  404 
Universe,  18,  47,  57 ;  external,  73- 

76;  real,  74 

Variation,  396,  421 

Velocity,   a   combination   of  speed 

and  bearing,  262;  an  epitome  of 

past  history,  351,  352 
Venn,  J.,  "  The  Logic  of  Chance," 

1 80 

Virchow,    R.,   "  Die    Freiheit    der 
.  Wissenschaft        im        modernen 

Staat,"46 
Vogt,   J.    G.,     "Das    Wesen    der 

Electricitat    und    des    Magnetis- 

mus,"  108 


Vortex-atom,    Sir    W.    Thomson's, 

316 
Vortex-ring,  317,  375 

Wallace,  A.  R.,  40;  "Darwinism," 
232  ;  "  Contributions  to  Natural 
Selection,"  484-5  ;  on  matter,  483 

Weismann,  31-33,  389,  396-399,409; 
"Essays  on  Heredity,"  13,  31, 

390-39 1 ,  394»  397,  398 
Weight,  366 
Westermarck,     E.,      "  History     of 

Human  Marriage,"  157,  426 
Will,  70,  83,  88,  148-152,  326  ;  as  a 

cause,   146 ;    as   a    stage  in    the 

routine  of  perceptions,  148 
Wordsworth,    "  General    View    of 

Poetry,"  43 
World,  external,  77,  87 ;   internal, 

87  ;  (real),  is  a  construct,  77 

Zeller,  E.,   "Die    Philosophic  der 

Griechen,"  230 
Zoology.  466 


Crown  81/0,  Cloth.     Price  35.  6d.  per  Vol.;  Half  Mor.,  6s.  6tt. 

THE  CONTEMPORARY  SCIENCE  SERIES 

EDITED  BY  HAVELOCK  ELLIS. 
Illustrated  Volumes,  containing  between  300  and  400  pages. 


Already  Published: — 

THE    EVOLUTION   OF   SEX.      By  Prof.  PATRICK  GEDDES 

and  J.  ARTHUR  THOMSON. 
ELECTRICITY     IN     MODERN     LIFE.       By    G.    W.    DE 

TUNZELMANN. 

THE  ORIGIN  OF  THE  ARYANS.     By  Dr.  ISAAC  TAYLOR. 
PHYSIOGNOMY  AND  EXPRESSION.     By  P.  MANTEGAZZA. 
EVOLUTION  AND  DISEASE.     By  J.   B.  SUTTON,  F.R.C.S. 
THE   VILLAGE   COMMUNITY,      By  G.  L.  GOMME. 
THE   CRIMINAL.     By  HAVELOCK  ELLIS. 
SANITY   AND   INSANITY.     By  Dr.  C   MERCIER. 
HYPNOTISM.     By  Dr.  ALBERT  MOLL  (Berlin). 
MANUAL   TRAINING.     By  Dr.  C.   M.  WOODWARD. 
SCIENCE   OF   FAIRY   TALES.     By  E.  SIDNEY  HARTLAND. 
PRIMITIVE    FOLK.     By  ELIE  RECLUS. 
THE   EVOLUTION   OF   MARRIAGE.     By  LETOURNEAU. 
BACTERIA     AND     THEIR     PRODUCTS.  '     By   Dr.    SIMS 

WOODHEAD. 

EDUCATION   AND    HEREDITY.     By  J.  M.  GUYAU. 
THE   MAN   OF   GENIUS.     By  Prof.  LOMBROSO. 
THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE.     By  Prof.  KARL  PEARSON. 
PROPERTY:   ITS    ORIGIN    AND    DEVELOPMENT.     By 

LETOURNEAU.  [/« preparation. 

The  follow  ing  Writers  are  preparing  Volumes  for  this  Series  : — 
Prof.  E.  D.  Cope,  Prof.  G.  F.  Fitzgerald,  Prof.  J.  Geikie,  Prof.  A.  C. 
Haddon,  Prof.  C.  H.  Herford,  Prof.  J.  Jastrow  (Wisconsin),  etc. 


London :   WALTER  SCOTT,  24  Warwick  Lane,  Paternoster  Row. 


IBSEN'S  PROSE  DRAMAS 

EDITED  BY  WILLIAM  ARCHER. 
IN  FIVE  VOLUMES. 


CROWN  8vo,  CLOTH,  PRICE  33.  6d.  PER  VOLUME. 


VOL.  I. 

"A   DOLL'S   HOUSE,"  "THE  LEAGUE  OF  YOUTH," 
and  "THE  PILLARS  OF  SOCIETY." 

VOL,  12. 

"GHOSTS,"    "AN    ENEMY   OF    THE    PEOPLE/'    and 
"THE  WILD  DUCK." 

VOL.  IIL 

"LADY    INGER   OF    OSTRAT,"  "THE   VIKINGS   AT 
HELGELAND,"  "THE  PRETENDERS." 

VOL.  IV. 

"EMPEROR   AND  GALILEAN."      With  an  Introductory 
Note  by  WILLIAM  ARCHER. 

VOL.   V. 

"ROSMERSHOLM";  "THE  LADY  FROM  THE  SEA"; 
"HEDDA  GABLER."    Translated  by  WILLIAM  ARCHER. 

London :  WALTER  SCOTT,  24  Warwick  Lane,  Paternoster  Row. 


IOOTH     THOUSAND. 


CROWN  Svo,  440  PAGES,  PRICE  ONE  SHILLING. 


THE  WORLD 

OF   CANT. 


"  Daily  Telegraph" — "  Decidedly  a  book  with  a  purpose." 

"Scotsman" — "A  vigorous,  clever,  and  almost  ferocious  exposure, 
in  the  form  of  a  story,  of  the  numerous  shams  and  injustices. " 

" Newcastle  Weekly  Chronicle" — "Trenchant  in  sarcasm,  warm  in 
commendation  of  high  purpose.  ...  A  somewhat  remarkable  book. " 

"London  Figaro" — "  It  cannot  be  said  that  the  author  is  partial ; 
clergymen  and  Nonconformist  divines,  Liberals  and  Conservatives, 
lawyers  and  tradesmen,  all  come  under  his  lash.  .  .  .  The  sketches  are 
worth  reading.  Some  of  the  characters  are  portrayed  with  considerable 
skill." 

"  May  the  Lord  deliver  us  from  all  Cant  :  may  the  Lord,  whatever 
else  He  do  or  forbear,  teach  us  to  look  facts  honestly  in  the  face,  and  to 
beware  (with  a  kind  of  shudder)  of  smearing  them  over  with  our 
despicable  and  damnable  palaver  into  irrecognisability,  and  so  falsifying 
the  Lord's  own  Gospels  to  His  unhappy  blockheads  of  Children, 
all  staggering  down  to  Gehenna  and  the  everlasting  Swine's-trough,  for 
want  of  Gospels. 

"O  Heaven  !  it  is  the  most  accursed  sin  of  man:  and  done  every- 
where at  present,  on  the  streets  and  high  places  at  noonday  !  Verily, 
seriously  I  say  and  pray  as  my  chief  orison,  May  the  Lord  deliver  us 
from  it. " — Letter  from  Carlyle  to  Emerson. 


London  :  WALTER  SCOTT,  24  Warwick  Lane,  Paternoster  Row. 


THE  NOVELTY  OF  THE  SEASON. 


SELECTED  THREE-VOL.  SETS 

IN    NEW   BROCADE    BINDING. 

6s.  per  Set,  in  Shell  Case  to  match. 


THE  FOLLOWING  SETS  CAN  BE  OBTAINED— 
POEMS    OF 


WORDSWORTH. 
KEATS. 
SHELLEY. 

COLERIDGE. 
SOUTHEY. 
COWPER. 

EARLY   ENGLISH 
POETRY. 
CHAUCER. 
SPENSER. 

HORACE. 
GREEK  ANTHOLOGY. 
LAND  OR. 

LONGFELLOW. 
WHITTIER. 
EMERSON. 

HOGG. 
ALLAN  RAMSAY. 
SCOTTISH    MINOR 
POETS. 

BORDER  BALLADS. 
JACOBITE  SONGS. 
OSSIAN. 

CAVALIER  POETS. 
LOVE  LYRICS. 
HERRICK. 

GOLDSMITH. 
MOORE. 
IRISH  MINSTRELSY. 

SHAKESPEARE. 
BEN  JONSON. 
MARLOWE. 

CHRISTIAN  YEAR. 
IMITATION    OF 
CHRIST. 
HERBERT. 

AMERICAN    HUMOR- 
OUS  VERSE. 
ENGLISH  HUMOROUS 
VERSE. 
BALLADES    AND 
RONDEAUS. 

WOMEN  POETS. 
CHILDREN  OF  POETS, 
SEA  MUSIC. 

SONNETS    OF    THIS 
CENTURY. 
SONNETS  OF  EUROPE. 
AMERICAN  SONNETS. 

HEINE. 
GOETHE. 
HUGO. 

PRAED. 
HUNT  AND  HOOD. 
DOBELL. 

MEREDITH. 
MARSTON. 
LOVE  LETTERS. 

SELECTED  TWO-YOLUME  SETS 

IN  NEW  BROCADE  BINDING. 
43,  per   Set,   in    Shell    Case  to   match. 


SCOTT  (Lady  of  the  Lake,  etc.). 
SCOTT  (Marmion,  etc.). 


BURNS  (Songs). 
BURNS  (Poems). 


BYRON  (Don  Juan,  etc.). 
BYRON  (Miscellaneous). 

MILTON  (Paradise  Lost). 
MILTON  (Paradise  Regained,  etc.). 


London :  WALTER  SCOTT,  24  Warwick  Lane,  Paternoster  Row. 


SELECTED  THREE-VOL  SETS 

IN    NEW    BROCADE    BINDING. 

6s.  per  Set,  in  Shell  Case  to  match. 


0,  W,  HOLMES  SERIES- 

Autocrat  of  the  Breakfast- 
Table. 

The  Professor  at  the  Break- 
fast-Table. 

The  Poet  at  the  Breakfast 
Table. 


LANDOR  SERIES- 

Landor's    Imaginary   Conver- 
sations. 

Pentameron. 
Pericles  and  Aspasia. 

THREE  ENGLISH  ESSAYISTS- 

Essays  of  Elia. 
Essays  of  Leigh  Hunt. 
Essays  of  William  Hazlitt. 


THREE  CLASSICAL  MORALISTS- 

Meditations    of    Marcus 

Aurelius. 

Teaching  of  Epictetus. 
Morals  of  Seneca. 


WALDEN  SERIES 

Thoreau's  Walden. 
Thoreau's  Week. 
Thoreau's  Essays. 

FAMOUS  LETTERS- 

Letters  of  Burns. 
Letters  of  Byron. 
Letters  of  Shelley. 

LOWELL  SERIES- 

My  Study  Windows. 
The  English  Poets. 
The  Biglow  Papers. 


London :  WALTER  SCOTT,  24  Warwick  Lane,  Paternoster  Row. 


GREAT   WRITERS. 

A    NEW    SERIES    OF    CRITICAL    BIOGRAPHIES. 

Edited  by  Professor  ERIC  S.  ROBERTSON,  M.A. 


MONTHLY      SHILLING     VOLUMES. 


VOLUMES  ALREADY  ISSUED— 

LIFE   OP    LONGFELLOW.     By  Prof.  Eric  S.  Robertson. 
"  A  most  readable  little  work." — Liverpool  Mercury. 

LIFE   OF   COLERIDGE.     By  Hall  Caine. 

' '  Brief  and  vigorous,  written  throughout  with  spirit  and  great  literary 
skill . " — Scotsman. 

LIFE   OF   DICKENS.     By  Frank  T.  Marzials. 

"  Notwithstanding  the  mass  of  matter  that  has  been  printed  relating  to 
Dickens  and  his  works  ...  we  should,  until  we  came  across  this  volume, 
have  been  at  a  loss  to  recommend  any  popular  life  of  England's  most 
popular  novelist  as  being  really  satisfactory..  The  difficulty  is  removed  by 
Mr.  Marzials's  little  book." — Athenceum. 

LIFE  OF  DANTE  GABRIEL  ROSSETTI.  By  J.  Knight. 

"Mr.  Knight's  picture  of  the  great  poet  and  painter  is  the  fullest  and 
best  yet  presented  to  the  public."— The  Graphic. 

LIFE   OF   SAMUEL   JOHNSON.     By  Colonel  F.  Grant. 
"Colonel  Grant  has  performed  his  task  with  diligence,  sound  judgment, 
good  taste,  and  accuracy." — Illustrated  London  News. 

LIFE    OF    DARWIN.     By  G.  T.  Bettany. 

"Mr.  G.  T.  Bettany's  Life  of  Darwin  is  a  sound  and  conscientious  work." 
— Saturday  Review. 

LIFE  OF  CHARLOTTE  BRONTE.    By  A.  Birrell. 

"Those  who  know  much  of  Charlotte  Bronte  will  learn  more,  and  those 
who  know  nothing  about  her  will  find  all  that  is  best  worth  learning  in 
Mr.  BirrelTs  pleasant  book." — St.  James'  Gazette. 

LIFE  OF  THOMAS    CARLYLE.     By  R.  Garnett,  LL.D. 
"  This  is  an  admirable  book.    Nothing  could  be  more  felicitous  and  fairer 
than  the  way  in  which  he  takes  us  through  Carlyle's  life  and  works." — Pall 
Mall  Gazette. 

LIFE   OF   ADAM   SMITH.     By  R.  B.  Haldane,  M.P. 

"Written  with  a  perspicuity  seldom  exemplified  when  dealing  with 
economic  science." — Scotsman. 

LIFE  OF  KEATS.     By  W.  M.  Rossetti. 

"  Valuable  for  the  ample  information  which  it  contains." — Cambridge 
Independent. 

LIFE    OF    SHELLEY.     By  William  Sharp. 

"  The  criticisms  .  .  .  entitle  this  capital  monograph  to  be  ranked  with 
the  best  biographies  of  Shelley." — Westminster  Review. 

LIFE   OF   SMOLLETT.     By  David  Hannay. 

"A  capable  record  of  a  writer  who  still  remains  one  of  the  great  masters 
of  the  English  novel." — Saturday  Revieiv. 

LIFE   OF   GOLDSMITH.     By  Austin  Dobson. 

"  The  story  of  his  literary  and  social  life  in  London,  with  all  its  humorous 
and  pathetic  vicissitudes,  is  here  retold,  as  none  could  tell  it  better."— 
Daily  News. 


LIFE  OP  SCOTT.     By  Professor  Yonge. 

"This  is  a  most  enjoyable  book." — Aberdeen  Free  Press. 
LIFE  OF  BURNS.     By  Professor  Blackie. 

"  The  editor  certainly  made  a  hit  when  he  persuaded  Blackie  to  write 
about  Burns."— Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

LIFE  OF  VICTOR  HUGO.     By  Frank  T.  Marzials. 

"  Mr.  Marzials's  volume  presents  to  us,  in  a  more  handy  form  than  any 
English  or  even  French  handbook  gives,  the  summary  of  what  is  known 
about  the  life  of  the  great  poet."— Saturday  Review. 

LIFE  OF  EMERSON.     By  Richard  Garnett,  LL.D. 

"  No  record  of  Emerson's  life  could  be  more  desirable." — Saturday  Review. 
LIFE  OF  GOETHE.  By  James  Sime. 

"Mr.  James  Sime's  competence  as  a  biographer  of  Goethe  is  beyond 
question." — Manchester  Guardian. 

LIFE  OF  CONGREVE.     By  Edmund  Gosse. 

"  Mr.  Gosse  has  written  an  admirable  biography." — Academy. 
LIFE  OF  BUNYAN.     By  Canon  Venables. 

"A  most  intelligent,  appreciative,  and  valuable  memoir."— Scotsman. 
LIFE  OF  CRABBE.     By  T.  E.  Kebbel. 

"  No  English  poet  since  Shakespeare  has  observed  certain  aspects  of 
nature  and  of  human  life  more  closely."— A thenceum. 

LIFE  OF  HEINE.     By  William  Sharp. 

"An  admirable  monograph  .  .  .  more  fully  written  up  to  the  level  of 
recent  knowledge  and  criticism  than  any  other  English  work."— Scotsman. 

LIFE  OF  MILL.     By  W.  L.  Courtney. 

"  A  most  sympathetic  and  discriminating  memoir." — Glasgow  Herald. 
LIFE  OF  SCHILLER.     By  Henry  W,  Nevinson. 

"  Presents  the  poet's  life  in  a  neatly  rounded  picture."— Scotsman. 

LIFE  OF  CAPTAIN  MARRY  AT.     By  David  Hannay. 

"  We  have  nothing  but  praise  for  the  manner  in  which  Mr.  Hannay  has 
done  justice  to  him."— Saturday  Revieiv. 

LIFE  OF  LESSING.     By  T.  W.  Rolleston. 

"  One  of  the  best  books  of  the  series."— Manchester  Guardian. 
LIFE  OF  MILTON.     By  Richard  Garnett,  LL.D. 

"  Has  never  been  more  charmingly  or  adequately  told." — Scottish  Leader. 
LIFE  OF  BALZAC.     By  Frederick  Wedmore. 
LIFE  OF  GEORGE  ELIOT.     By  Oscar  Browning. 
LIFE  OF  JANE  AUSTEN.    By  Goldwin  Smith. 
LIFE  OF  BROWNING.     By  William  Sharp. 
LIFE  OF  BYRON.     By  Hon.  Roden  Noel. 
LIFE  OF  HAWTHORNE.     By  Moncure  Conway. 
LIFE  OF  SCHOPENHAUER.     By  Professor  Wallace. 
LIFE  OF  SHERIDAN.     By  Lloyd  Sanders. 
LIFE  OF  THACKERAY.     By  Herman  Merivale  and  Frank 

T.  Marzials. 
LIFE  OF  CERVANTES.    By  W.  E.  Watts. 

Library  Edition  of  "  Great  Writers"  Demy  %vo,  2s.  6d. 


London :  WALTER  SCOTT,  24  Warwick  Lane,  Paternoster  Row. 


EDITED  BY  WILLIAM  SHARP. 
Cloth,  Red  Edges  -  Is.  I 
Cloth,  Uncut  Edges  -  Is. 


IN  i/-  MONTHLY  VOLUMES. 
Red  Roan,  Gilt  Edges  2s.  6d. 
Pad.  Morocco,  Gilt  Edges  -  5s. 


KEBLE'S  CHRISTIAN  YEAR. 
COLERIDGE.  Ed.  by  J.  Skipsey. 
LONGFELLOW.  Ed.  by  E.  Hope. 
CAMPBELL.  Ed.  by  J.  Hogben. 
SHELLEY.  Edited  by  J.  Skipsey. 
WORDSWORTH. 

Edited  by  A.  J.  Symington. 
BLAKE.  Ed.  by  Joseph  Skipsey. 
WHITTIER.  Ed.  by  Eva  Hope. 
POE.  Edited  by  Joseph  Skipsey. 
CHATTERTON.  By  J.  Richmond. 
BURNS.  Poems  \  Edited  by 
BURNS.  Songs /Joseph  Skipsey. 
MARLOWE.  Ed.byP.E.Pinkerton. 
KEATS.  Edited  by  John  Hogben. 
HERBERT.  Edited  by  E.  Rhys. 
HUGO.  Trans,  by  Dean  Carrington. 
COWPER.  Edited  by  Eva  Hope. 
SHAKESPEARE'S  Poems,  etc. 
Edited  by  William  Sharp. 
EMERSON.  Edited  by  W.  Lewin. 
SONNETS  of  this  CENTURY. 

Edited  by  William  Sharp. 

WHITMAN.  Edited  by  E.  Rhys. 
SCOTT.  Marmion,  etc. 
SCOTT.  Lady  of  the  Lake,  etc. 
Edited  by  William  Sharp. 
PRAED.  Edited  by  Fred.  Cooper. 
HOGG.ByhisDaughter.Mrs.  Garden. 
GOLDSMITH.  Ed.  by  W.  Tirebuck. 
MACKAY'S  LOVE  LETTERS. 
SPENSER.  Edited  by  Hon.  R.  Noel. 
CHILDREN  OF  THE  POETS. 

Edited  by  Eric  S.  Robertson. 
JONSON.  Edited  by  J.  A.  Symonds. 
BYRON  (2  Vols.)  Ed.byM. Blind. 
THE  SONNETS  OF  EUROPE. 
Edited  by  S.  Waddington. 
RAMSAY.  Ed.  by  J.  L.  Robertson. 
DOBELL.  Edited  by  Mrs.  Dobell. 
DAYS  OF  THE  YEAR. 

With  Introduction  by  Wm.  Sharp. 
POPE.  Edited  by  John  Hogben. 
HEINE.  Edited  by  Mrs.  Kroeker. 
BEAUMONT  &  FLETCHER. 

Edited  by  J.  S.  Fletcher. 
BOWLES,  LAMB,   &c. 

Edited  by  William  Tirebuck. 
EARLY  ENGLISH  POETRY. 
Edited  by  H.  Macaulay  Fitzgibbon. 
SEA  MUSIC.  Edited  by  Mrs  Sharp. 
HERRICK.  Edited  by  ErnestRhys. 
BALLADES  AND  RONDEAUS 

Edited  by  J.  Gleeson  White. 


IRISH  MINSTRELSY. 

Edited  by  H.  Halliday  Sparling. 
MILTON'S  PARADISE  LOST. 
Edited  by  J.  Bradshaw,  M.A.,  LL.D. 
JACOBITE    BALLADS. 

Edited  by  G.  S.  Macquoid. 
AUSTRALIAN  BALLADS. 

Edited  by  D.  B.  W.  Sladen,  B.A. 
MOORE.  Edited  by  John  Dorrian 
BORDER  BALLADS. 

Edited  by  Graham  R.  Tomson. 
SONG-TIDE.  By  P.  B.  Marston. 
ODES  OF  HORACE. 

Translations  by  Sir  S.  de  Vere,  Bt. 
OSSI  AN.  Edited  by  G.  E.  Todd. 
ELFIN  MUSIC.  Ed.  by  A.  Waite. 
SOUTHEY.  Ed.  byS.  R.  Thompson. 
CHAUCER.  Edited  by  F.  N.  Paton. 
POEMS  OF  WILD  LIFE. 
Edited  by  Chas.  G.  D.  Roberts,  M.A. 
PARADISE  REGAINED. 
Edited  by  J.  Bradahaw,  M.A.,  LL.D. 
CRABBE.  Edited  by  E.Lamplough. 
DORA  GREENWELL. 

Edited  by  William  Dorling. 
FAUST.  Edited  by  E.  Craigmyle. 
AMERICAN  SONNETS. 

Edited  by  William  Sharp. 
LANDOR'S  POEMS. 

Selected  and  Edited  by  E.  Radford. 
GREEK  ANTHOLOGY. 

Edited  by  Graham  R.  Tomson. 
HUNT  AND  HOOD. 

Edited  by  J.  Harwood  Panting. 
HUMOROUS  POEMS. 

Edited  by  Ralph  H.  Caine. 
LYTTON'S  PLAYS. 

Edited  by  R.  F.  Sharp. 
GREAT  ODES.  Ed.  by  Wm.  Sharp. 
MEREDITH'S  POEMS 

Edited  by  M.  Betham- Edwards. 
PAINTER-POETS. 

Edited  by  Kineton  Parkes. 
WOMEN  POETS. 

Edited  by  Mrs.  Sharp. 
LOVE  LYRICS. 

Edited  by  Percy  Hulburd. 
AMERICAN  HUMOROUS 

VERSE.          Edited  by  Jas.  Barr. 
MINOR  SCOTCH  LYRICS. 

.Edited  by  Sir  George  Douglas. 
CAVALIER  LYRISTS. 

Edited  by  W.  H.  Dircks. 


London :  WALTER  SCOTT,  24  Warwick  Lane,  Paternoster  Row. 


IBSEN'S  PROSE  DRAMAS 

EDITED  BY  WILLIAM  ARCHER. 
IN  P'IVE  VOLUMES. 


CROWN  8vo,  CLOTH,  PRICE  3s.  6d.  PER  VOLUME. 


VOL.  I. 

"A  DOLL'S  HOUSE,"  "THE  LEAGUE  OF  YOUTH," 
and  "  THE  PILLARS  OF  SOCIETY." 

VOL.  II. 

"GHOSTS,"  "AN  ENEMY  OF  THE  PEOPLE,"  and 
"THE  WILD  DUCK." 

VOL.  III. 

"LADY  INGER  OF  OSTRAT,"  "THE  VIKINGS  AT 
HELGELAND,"  "THE  PRETENDERS." 

VOL.  IV. 

"  EMPEROR  AND  GALILEAN."  With  an  Introductory 
Note  by  WILLIAM  ARCHER. 

VOL.    V. 

"ROSMERSHOLM";  "THE  LADY  FROM  THE  SEA"; 
and  A  NEW  PLAY  (hitherto  unpublished),  translated  by 
WILLIAM  ARCHER. 


London :  WALTER  SCOTT,  24  Warwick  Lane,  Paternoster  Row. 


Crown  Svo,  about  350 //.  each,  Cloth. Cover,  2S.  6d. per  vol. 
Half-polished  Morocco,  gilt  top,  $s. 


COUNT  TOLSTOI'S  WORKS, 


The  following  Volumes  are  already  issued— 

A  RUSSIAN   PROPRIETOR. 

THE   COSSACKS. 

IVAN   ILYITCH,  AND  OTHER  STORIES. 

THE   INVADERS,   AND  OTHER  STORIES. 

MY   RELIGION. 

LIFE. 

MY   CONFESSION. 
CHILDHOOD,    BOYHOOD,    YOUTH. 

THE  PHYSIOLOGY  OF  WAR. 
ANNA    KARENINA.     (2  VOLS.) 

WHAT   TO   DO? 

WAR   AND   PEACE.     (4  VOLS.) 

THE  LONG  EXILE,  AND  OTHER  STORIES  FOR  CHILDREN. 

SEVASTOPOL. 

THE  KREUTZER  SONATA,  AND  FAMILY 
HAPPINESS. 

Uniform  with  the  above. 

IMPRESSIONS    OF    RUSSIA. 

BY  DR.  GEORG  BRANDES. 

London  :  WALTER  SCOTT,  24  Warwick  Lane,  Paternoster  Row. 


BOOKLETS. 


Crown  8v0,  Gilt  Lettering^  One  Shilling  each. 
BY  COUNT  LEO  TOLSTOI 

WHERE    LOVE    IS,    THERE    GOD 
IS  ALSO. 

THE  TWO    PILGRIMS. 

WHAT    MEN    LIVE    BY. 
THE  GODSON. 

IF  YOU   NEGLECT   THE    FIRE,   YOU 
DON'T    PUT    IT   OUT. 

WHAT   SHALL    IT    PROFIT  A   MAN? 

Published  originally  in  Russia,  as  tracts  for  the  people, 
these  little  stories  possess  all  the  grace,  naivetd,  and  power 
which  characterise  the  work  of  Count  Tolstoi,  and  while 
inculcating  in  the  most  penetrating  way  the  Christian  ideas 
of  love,  humility,  and  charity,  are  perfect  in  their  art  form 
as  stories  pure  and  simple. 

London:  WALTER  SCOTT,  24  Warwick  Lane,  Paternoster  Row. 


THE  OXFORD  LIBRARY. 

Handsomely  Bound  in  Blue  Cloth,   Gilt  Top,   Unciit  Edges, 
Price  2s    each. 


1  Barnaby  Budge. 

2  Old  Curiosity  Shop. 

3  Pickwick  Papers. 

4  Nicholas  Nickleby. 

5  Oliver  Twist. 

6  Martin  Chuzzlewit. 

7  Sketches  by  Boz. 

8  Dombey  and  Son. 

9  Paul  Clifford. 

10  Eugene  Aram. 

11  Ernest  Maltravers. 

12  Alice ;  or,  The  Mysteries. 

13  Rienzi. 

14  Pelham. 

15  Last  Days  of  Pompeii. 

16  Last  of  the  Barons. 

17  Night  and  Morning 

18  Ivanhoe. 

19  Kenilworth. 

20  Bride  of  Lammermoor. 

21  Heart  of  Midlothian 

22  Old  Mortality. 

23  Waverley. 

24  Guy  Mannering. 

25  Rob  Roy. 

26  Fortunes  of  NigeL 

27  Quentin  Durward. 

28  Talisman. 

29  Jacob  Faithful. 

30  Peter  Simple. 
SI  Poor  Jack. 

32  Midshipman  Easy. 

33  Jack  Hinton. 

34  Harry  Lorrequer. 

35  Charles  O'Malley. 

36  Roderick  Random. 

37  Peregrine  Pickle. 

38  Tom  Cringle's  Log. 

39  Cruise  of  the  Midge. 

40  Handy  Andy. 

41  Vanity  Fair. 

42  Colleen  Bawn. 

43  Valentine  Vox. 

44  Mansfield  Park. 

45  Last  of  the  Mohicans. 

46  Vicar  of  Wakefield, 

47  Robinson  Crusoe. 

48  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin. 

49  The  White  Slave. 

50  Bret  Harte. 

51  Jane  Eyre. 

52  Wide,  Wide  World. 

53  Village  Tales. 

54  The  Scottish  Chiefs. 

55  Wilson's  Tales. 

56  The  Inheritance. 
67  The  Lamplighter. 


58  For  a  Song's  Sake. 

59  Ben-Hur. 

60  Infelice. 

61  Beulah. 

62  Prince  of  the  House  of  David. 

63  Pillar  of  Fire. 

64  Throne  of  David. 

65  From  Jest  to  Earnest. 

66  Knight  of  the  Nineteenth  Century. 

67  A  Mountain  Daisy. 

68  Hazel ;  or,  Perilpoint  Lighthouse. 

69  Mrs.  Caudle's  Lectures. 

70  Sheridan's  Plays. 

71  Burns's  Complete  Poetical  Works. 

72  The  Essays  of  Elia. 

73  Ingoldsby  Legends. 

74  Bunyan. 

75  Fpxe's  Book  of  Martyrs. 

76  Life  of  General  Gordon. 

77  Lincoln  and  Garfield. 

78  Lives  Great  and  Simple. 

79  Queens  of  Literature. 

80  Our  American  Cousins. 

81  Our  Queen. 

82  Conduct  and  Duty. 

83  Life  of  David  Livingstone. 

84  Life  of  Grace  Darling. 

85  Golden  Gleams  :  Beecher. 

86  Memorable  Shipwrecks. 

87  Memorable  Engineers. 

88  Tales  of  the  Covenanters. 

89  Elijah,  the  Prophet. 

90  The  Young  Woman's  Friend. 

91  The  Young  Man's  Friend. 

92  A  Jolly  Fellowship. 

93  Una  Montgomery. 

94  Life  of  Garibaldi. 

95  Life  of  Robert  Moffat. 

96  Life  of  W.  E.  Gladstone. 

97  Life  of  Beaconsfield. 

98  Life  of  Richard  Cobden. 

99  Life  of  John  Bright. 

100  Life  of  H.  W.  Beecher. 

101  Women's  Voices. 

102  Sonnets  of  this  Century. 

103  Children  of  the  Poets. 

104  Sacred  Song. 

105  Australian  Song. 

106  Jacobite  Songs  and  Ballads. 

107  Irish  Minstrelsy. 

108  The  Sonnets  of  Europe. 

109  English  and  Scottish  Poetry. 

110  Ballads  of  the  North. 

111  Songs  and  Poems  of  the  Sea. 

112  Songs  and  Poems  of  Fairyland. 

113  Songs  of  the  Great  Dominion. 

114  My  Study  Windows. 


London:  WALTER  SCOTT,  24  Warwick  Lane,  Paternoster  Row. 


20th   THOUSAND. 
Demy  %vo,  Paper  Cover,  Price  is. 

SOCIALISM :  THE  FABIAN  ESSAYS. 

EDITED  BY  G.  BERNARD  SHAW. 

Essays  by  G.  BERNARD  SHAW,  SYDNEY  OLIVIER,  SIDNEY  WEBB, 
WM.  CLARKE,  HUBERT  BLAND,  ANNIE  BESANT,  G.  WALLAS. 

WHAT   THE   PRESS   SAYS. 

"The  writers  of  the  'Fabian  Essays  in  Socialism'  have  produced  a  volume 
which  ought  to  be  read  by  all  who  wish  to  understand  the  movements  of  the 
time." — Daily  News. 

"  We  think  every  minister  of  religion,  and  every  intelligent,  earnest  Christian 
ought  to  read  and  ponder  this  most  important  and  fascinating  volume." — The 
Methodist  Times. 

"We  attach  great  importance  to  this  collection  of  essays  as  a  fair  and  com- 
petent representation  of  the  Socialist  case." — Co-operative  News. 

An  Indispensable  Handbook  for  Politicians  and  the  Public. 
JUST  ISSUED,  PRICE  is. 

THE  EIGHT  HOURS  DAY. 

By  SIDNEY  WEBB,  LL.B.,   and   HAROLD  COX,  B.A. 

CONTENTS  : — Account  of  Shorter  Hours  Movement  in  England, 
United  States,  Australia,  and  Continent — Present  Hours  of  Labour  and 
Factory  Legislation — Economic  Results  of  Shortening  of  Hours — Over- 
time— Complete  Review  of  Arguments  for  and  against  Eight  Hours  Bill 
— Practical  Proposals,  etc. 

"  The  unique  value  of  this  little  book  lies  in  its  collection  of  facts.  It  is 
likely  for  some  time  to  hold  the  field  as  the  handbook  to  one  of  the  chief  items 
in  the  social  politics  of  the  immediate  future."— Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

Crown  8vo,  Cloth^  2s.  6d.;  Paper  Covers,  is. 

OUR  AMERICAN   COUSINS. 

By  W.  E.  ADAMS. 

"  We  can  heartily  recommend  Mr.  Adams's  book  to  those  Englishmen  who 
want  to  know  something  about  America."— Saturday  Review. 

"Altogether,  it  is  a  sober,  sensible  book,  by  a  level-headed  observer  of  men 
and  things."— Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

Just  Issued.     Price  I  s.,  Crown  8z>0. 

ROSMERSHOLM. 

A  DRAMA  IN  FOUR  ACTS.     BY  HENRIK  IBSEN. 
Translated  by  CHARLES  ARCHER. 

London :  WALTER  SCOTT,  24  Warwick  Lane,  Paternoster  Row. 


Quarto,  doth  elegant,  gilt  edges,  emblematic  design  on  cover,  6s. 
May  also  be  had  in  a  variety  of  Fancy  Bindings. 


THE 


MUSIC  OF  THE  POETS: 

A  MUSICIANS'  BIRTHDAY  BOOK. 

EDITED  BY  ELEONORE  D'ESTERRE  KEELING. 


This  is  a  unique  Birthday  Book.  Against  each  date  are  given 
the  names  of  musicians  whose  birthday  it  is,  together  with  a 
verse-quotation  appropriate  to  the  character  of  their  different 
compositions  or  performances.  A  special  feature  of  the  book 
consists  in  the  reproduction  in  fac-simile  of  autographs,  and 
autographic  music,  of  living  composers.  The  selections  of  verse 
(from  before  Chaucer  to  the  present  time)  have  been  made  with 
admirable  critical  insight.  English  verse  is  rich  in  utterances  of 
the  poets  about  music,  and  merely  as  a  volume  of  poetry  about 
music  this  book  makes  a  charming  anthology.  Three  sonnets  by 
Mr.  Theodore  Watts,  on  the  "Fausts"  of  Berlioz,  Schumann, 
and  Gounod,  have  been  written  specially  for  this  volume.  It  is 
illustrated  with  designs  of  various  musical  instruments,  etc.; 
autographs  of  Ruben  stein,  Dvorak,  Greig,  Mackenzie,  Villiers 
Stanford,  etc.,  etc. 

"To  musical  amateurs  this  will  certainly  prove  the  most 
attractive  birthday  book  ever  published." — Manchester  Guardian. 

"  One  of  those  happy  ideas  that  seems  to  have  been  yearning 
for  fulfilment.  .  .  .  The  book  ought  to  have  a  place  on  every 
music  stand." — Scottish  Leader. 


London :  WALTER  SCOTT,  24  Warwick  Lane,  Paternoster  Row. 


Crown  8vo,  Cloth.    Price  y.  6d  per  Vol.;  Half  Mar.,  6s.  6d\ 

THE  CONTEMPORARY  SCIENCE  SERIES 

EDITED  BY  HAVELOCK  ELLIS. 
Illustrated  Volumes,  containing  between  300  and  400  pages. 


Already  Published; — 

THE    EVOLUTION   OF   SEX.      By  Prof.  PATRICK  GEDDES 

and  J.  ARTHUR  THOMSON. 
ELECTRICITY     IN     MODERN     LIFE.       By    G.    W.    DE 

TUNZELMANN. 

THE  ORIGIN  OF  THE  ARYANS.     By  Dr.  ISAAC  TAYLOR. 
PHYSIOGNOMY  AND  EXPRESSION.     By  P.  MANTEGAZZA. 
EVOLUTION  AND  DISEASE.     By  J.  B.  SUTTON,  F.R.C.S. 
THE   VILLAGE   COMMUNITY.      By  G.  L.  GOMME. 
THE   CRIMINAL.     By  HAVELOCK  ELLIS. 
SANITY   AND    INSANITY.     By  Dr.  C   MERCIER. 
HYPNOTISM.     By  Dr.  ALBERT  MOLL  (Berlin). 
MANUAL   TRAINING.     By  Dr.  C  M..  WOODWARD. 
SCIENCE   OF   FAIRY   TALES.     By  E.  SIDNEY  HARTLAND. 
PRIMITIVE    FOLK.     By  ELIE  RECLUS. 
THE   EVOLUTION   OF   MARRIAGE.     By  LETOURNEAU. 
BACTERIA     AND     THEIR     PRODUCTS.       By   Dr.    SIMS 

WOODHEAD. 

EDUCATION   AND    HEREDITY.     By  J.  M.  GUYAU. 
THE   MAN   OF   GENIUS.     By  Prof.  LOMBROSO. 
THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE.     By  Prof.  KARL  PEARSON. 
PROPERTY:   ITS    ORIGIN    AND    DEVELOPMENT.     By 

LETOURNEAU.  [/„  preparation. 

The  following  Writers  are  preparing  Volumes  for  this  Series: — 
Prof.   E.  D.  Cope,  Prof.  G.  F.  Fitzgerald,  Prof.  J.  Geikie,  Prof.  A.  C. 
Haddon,  Prof.  C.  H.  Herford,  Prof.  J.  Jastrow  (Wisconsin),  etc. 


London :   WALTER  SCOTT,  24  Warwick  Lane,  Paternoster  Row. 


I/-  BOOKS  IN  PAPER  COVERS. 


THE    WORLD    OF    CANT. 

(120  THOUSAND.) 

Daily  Telegraph.—"  Decidedly  a  book  with  a  purpose." 

Scotsman. — "  A  vigorous,  clever,  and  almost  ferocious  exposure,  in  the  form 
of  a  story,  of  the  numerous  shams  and  injustices." 


MR.    BARNES   OF   NEW  YORK. 

BY  ARCHIBALD  CLAVERING  GUNTER. 


OUR  AMERICAN   COUSINS. 

BY  W.  E.  ADAMS. 

"  The  author  brings  to  his  work  acute  penetration,  a  keen  observation,  a  graphic 
picturesque  style  of  presenting  his  impressions,  and  a  quiet  humour  that  finds 
expression  in  quoting  amusing  scraps  from  newspaper  stories  and  sayings 
aptly  illustrate  the  case  in  point."  —  Pew  York  Herald. 


that 


MEN  AND  WOMEN  OF  THE  DAY. 

BY  LILLIE  HARRIS.  [50^  Thousand. 


DON   JUAN  ;    OR  THE  ELIXIR  OF  LONG  LIFE, 
AND  OTHER  STORIES. 

By  BALZAC. 


AN    EXILE'S    ROMANCE. 

BY  ARTHUR  KEYSER.  \$th  Edition. 


THE   REFUGEES  OF   MARTINIQUE. 

BY  EUGENE  SUE. 


A   BOOK   OF    BLUNDERS. 

BY  REV.  D.  MACRAE. 


THE  BEST  WAY  TO   GET  ON  : 

A  PRACTICAL  GUIDE  TO  MONEY  MAKING  AND   MONEY 
SPENDING. 

London :  WALTER  SCC/TT,  24  Warwick  Lane,  Paternoster  Row. 


COMPACT  AND  PRACTICAL. 
In  Limp  Cloth  ;  for  the  Pocket.     Price  One  Shilling. 

THE    EUROPEAN 

CONVERSATION  BOOKS, 


FRENCH  ITALIAN 

SPANISH  GERMAN 

NORWEGIAN 

CONTENTS. 

Hints  to  Travellers — Everyday  Expressions — Arriving  at 
and  Leaving  a  Railway  Station — Custom  House  Enquiries — In 
a  Train — At  a  Buffet  and  Restaurant — At  an  Hotel — Paying  an 
Hotel  Bill— Enquiries  in  a  Town — On  Board  Ship — Embarking 
and  Disembarking — Exciirsion  by  Carriage — Enquiries  as  to 
Diligences — Enquiries  as  to  Boats — Engaging  Apartments — 
Washing  List  and  Days  of  Week — Restaurant  Vocabulary — 
Telegrams  and  Letters,  etc.,  etc. 


The  contents  of  these  little  handbooks  are  so  arranged  as  to 
permit  direct  and  immediate  reference.  All  dialogues  or  enquiries  not 
considered  absolutely  essential  have  been  purposely  excluded,  nothing 
being  introduced  which  might  confuse  the  traveller  rather  than  assist 
him.  A  few  hints  are  given  in"  the  introduction  which  will  be  found 
valuable  to  those  unaccustomed  to  foreign  travel. 

London :  WALTER  SCOTT,  24  Warwick  Lane,  Paternoster  Row. 


SPECIAL  THREE-VOLUME    SETS. 


BY  OLIVER  WENDELL  HOLMES— 
(THE  AUTOCRAT  OF  THE  BREAKFAST-TABLE. 
SET  No.  1.4  THE  POET  AT  THE  BREAKFAST-TABLE. 

I  THE  PROFESSOR  AT  THE  BREAKFAST-TABLE. 

BY  WALTER  SAVAGE  LANDOR— 
(IMAGINARY  CONVERSATIONS. 
SET  No.  2.^  THE  PENTAMERON. 

I  PERICLES  AND  ASPASIA. 

THREE  ENGLISH  ESSAYISTS— 
(ESSAYS  OF  ELIA  (CHARLES  LAMB). 
SET  No.  3^  ESSAYS  OF  LEIGH  HUNT. 

(ESSAYS  OF  WILLIAM  HAZLITT. 

THREE  CLASSICAL  MORALISTS— 
(THE  MORALS  OF  SENECA. 
SET  No.  4^  THE  TEACHINGS  OF  EPICTETUS. 

I  THE  MEDITATIONS  OF  MARCUS  AURELIUS. 
BY  HENRY  DAVID  THOREAU— 

{WALDEN. 
A  WEEK  ON  THE  CONCORD  AND  MERRIMAC 
RIVERS. 
MISCELLANEOUS  ESSAYS. 

FAMOUS  LETTERS— 
<,__    (LETTERS  OF  BYRON. 
N*  fi<  LETTERS  OF  SHELLEY. 

0  (LETTERS  OF  BURNS. 
LOWELL  SERIES— 

«__    f  MY  STUDY  WINDOWS. 
No  7  1  THE  ENGLISH  POETS. 

'  I  THE  BIGLOW  PAPERS. 

3  Vols.,  Crown  8uo,  Cloth,  Gilt  Top, 

in  Shell  Case     Price  4>6 

3  Ko/s.,  Crown  8uo,  Cloth t  Gilt  Top, 

in  Cloth  Pedestal  Case         ...     5[- 


May  also  be  had  separately  at  1/6  each. 


Also  in  Half  Morocco,    Gilt    Top; 
and  full  Roan>  Gilt  Edges, 
Shell  Case. 


Eeducedfac  simile  of  Three-Vol.  Set  in  Cas 


London:  WALTER  SCOTT,  24  W^vick  Lane,  Paternoster  Row. 


RETURN  TO  the  circulation  desk  of  any 
University  of  California  Library 

or  to  the 

NORTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 

University  of  California 
Richmond  Field  Station,  Bldg.  400 

1301  South  46th  Street 
Richmond,  CA  94804-4698 

ALL  BOOKS  MAY  BE  RECALLED  AFTER  7  DAYS 

To  renew  or  recharge  your  library  materials,  you  may 

contact  NRLF  4  days  prior  to  due  date  at  (510)  642-6233 

DUE  AS  STAMPED  BELOW 

SEP  05  2007 


DD20  12M  7-06 



